W O R L D

V I E W

Why businesspeople don't necessarily make great economists.

A Country Is Not a Company
by Paul Krugman
College students who plan to go
into business often major in economics, but few believe that they
will end up using what they hear in
the lecture hall. Those students understand a fundamental truth: What
they learn in economics courses
won't help them run a business.
The converse is also true: What
people learn from running a business won't help them formulate economic policy. A country is not a big
corporation. The hahits of mind that
make a great business leader are not,
in general, those that make a great
economic analyst; an executive who
has made $1 billion is rarely the
right person to turn to for advice
about a $6 trillion economy.
Why should that be pointed out?
After all, neither businesspeople nor
economists are usually very good
poets, but so what? Yet many people
(not least successful business executives themselves) believe that someone who has made a personal fortune will know how to make an
entire nation more prosperous. In
fact, his or her advice is often disastrously misguided.
40

I am not claiming that businesspeople are stupid or that economists
are particularly smart. On the contrary, if the 100 top U.S. business executives got together with the 100
leading economists, the least impressive of the former group would
probably outshine the most impressive of the latter. My point is that
the style of thinking necessary for
economic analysis is very different
from that which leads to success in
business. By understanding that difference, we can begin to understand
what it means to do good economic
analysis and perhaps even help some
businesspeople become the great
economists they surely have the intellect to be.
Let me begin with two examples
of economic issues that I have found
business executives generally do not
understand: first, the relationship
between exports and job creation,
and, second, the relationship between foreign investment and trade
balances. Both issues involve international trade, partly because it is
the area I know best but also because
it is an area in which businesspeople

seem particularly inclined to make
false analogies between countries
and corporations.

Exports and Jobs
Business executives consistently
misunderstand two things about the
relationship hetween international
trade and domestic job creation.
First, since most U.S. businesspeople support free trade, they generally agree that expanded world
trade is good for world employment.
Specifically, they helieve that free
trade agreements sueh as the recently concluded General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade are good largely because they mean more jobs around
the world. Second, businesspeople
tend to helieve that countries compete for those jobs. The more the
United States exports, the thinking
goes, the more people we will emPaul Krugmar} is a professor of economics at Stanford University in
Palo Alto. California. His last HBR
article was "Does Third World
Growth Hurt First World Prosperity}" (July-August 1994).
DRAWINGS BY CHRISTOPHER BING

W O R t D

ploy, and the more we import, the
fewer jobs will he available. According to tbat view, the United States
must not only have free trade hut also be sufficiently competitive to get
a large proportion of the jobs tbat
free trade creates.
Do those propositions sound reasonable? Of course they do. This sort
of rhetoric dominated the last U.S.
presidential election and will likely
he heard again in the upcoming race.
However, economists in general do
not believe that free trade creates
more jobs worldwide (or that its benefits should be measured in terms of
job creation) or that countries that
are highly successful exporters will
have lower unemployment than
those that run trade deficits.
Why don't economists subscribe
to what sounds like common sense
to businesspeople? The idea that free
trade means more glohal johs seems
obvious: More trade means more exports and tberefore more exportrelated jobs. But there is a problem
with that argument. Because one
country's exports are another country's imports, every dollar of export
sales is, as a matter of sheer mathematical necessity, matched by a dollar of spending shifted from some
country's domestic goods to imports. Unless there is some reason to
think tbat free trade will increase
total world spending - which is not
a necessary outcome - overall world
demand will not change.
Moreover, heyond this indisputable point of arithmetic lies the
question of what limits the overall
number of jobs available. Is it simply
a matter of insufficient demand for
goods? Surely not, except in the very
short run. It is, after all, easy to increase demand. The Federal Reserve
can print as much money as it likes,
and it has repeatedly demonstrated
its ability to create an economic
boom when it wants to. Why, then,
doesn't the Fed try to keep tbe economy booming all tbe time? Because
it believes, with good reason, that if
it were to do so-if it were to create
too many johs - the result would he
unacceptable and accelerating inflation. In other words, the constraint
on the number of johs in the United
States is not the U.S. economy's abil-

V I E W

ity to generate demand, from exports
or any other source, but the level of
unemployment that the Fed thinks
the economy needs in order to keep
inflation under control.
That is not an abstract point. During 1994, the Fed raised interest
rates seven times and made no secret
of the fact that it was doing so to
cool off an economic boom that it
feared would create too many jobs,
overbeat tbe economy, and lead to inflation. Consider what
that implies for the effect of trade on employment. Suppose
that the U.S. economy
were to experience an
export surge. Suppose,
for example, that the
United States agreed
to drop its objections to slave labor if
China agreed to buy $200 billion
worth of U.S. goods. What would the
Fed do? It would offset the expansionary effect of the exports by raising interest rates; thus any increase
in export-related jobs would be more
or less matched hy a loss of johs
in interest-rate-sensitive sectors of
the economy, such as construction.
Conversely, the Fed would surely respond to an import surge by lowering interest rates, so the direct loss
of johs to import competition would
be roughly matehed hy an increased
number of jobs elsewhere.

Needless to say, this argument
does not sit well with business audiences. (Wben I argued on one business panel that the North American
Free Trade Agreement would have
no effect, positive or negative, on the
total number of jobs in tbe United
States, one of my fellow panelists a NAFTA supporter - reacted with
rage: "It's comments like that that
explain why people bate econo-

Many people believe that
someone vs^ho has made a
personal fortune will know
hovs^ to make an entire
nation more prosperous.

Even if we ignore the point that
free trade always increases world
imports by exaetly as much as it increases world exports, there is still
no reason to expect free trade to increase U.S. employment, nor should
we expect any other trade policy,
such as export promotion, to increase the total number of jobs in
our economy. When the U.S. secretary of commerce returns from a trip
abroad with billions of dollars in
new orders for U.S. companies, he
may or may not be instrumental in
creating thousands of export-related
jobs. If he is, he is also instrumental
in destroying a roughly equal number of jobs elsewhere in the economy. The ability of the U.S. economy
to increase exports or roll back imports has essentially nothing to do
with its success in creating jobs.

HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW January-February 1996

mists!") The job gains from increased exports or losses from import competition are tangible: You
can actually see the people making
the goods that foreigners buy, the
workers whose factories were closed
in the face of import competition.
The other effects that economists
talk ahout seem ahstract. And yet if
you accept the idea that the Fed has
both a johs target and the means to
achieve it, you must conclude that
changes in exports and imports have
little effect on overall employment.

Investment and the
Trade Balance
Our second example, the relationship between foreign investment
and trade balances, is equally troubling to husinesspeople. Suppose
that hundreds of multinational companies decide that a country is an
ideal manufacturing site and start
pouring billions of dollars a year into
the country to build new plants.
What happens to tbe country's trade
balance? Business executives, almost without exception, believe
that tbe country will start to run
trade surpluses. They are generally
unconvinced by tbe economist's answer that such a country will necessarily run large trade deficits.
It's easy to see where the businesspeople's answer comes from. They
think of their own companies and
ask what would happen if capacity
41

W O R L D

in their industries suddenly expanded. Clearly their companies would
import less and export more. If the
same story is played out in many industries, surely this would mean a
shift toward a trade surplus for the
economy as a whole.
The economist knows that just
the opposite is true. Why? Because
the balance of trade is part of the
balance of payments, and the overall

V I E W

mists hold; it is an unavoidable accounting truism.
So what happens when a country
attracts a lot of foreign investment?
With the inflow of capital, foreigners
are acquiring more assets in that
country than the country's residents
are acquiring abroad. But that
means, as a matter of sheer accounting, that the country's imports
must, at the same time, exceed its
exports. A country that
attracts large capital inflows will necessarily run
a trade deficit.
But that is just accounting. How does it
happen in practice? When
companies build plants,
they will purchase some
imported equipment. The
investment inflow may spark a domestic boom, which leads to surging import demand. If the country
has a floating exchange rate, the
investment inflow may drive up the
currency's value; if the country's
exchange rate is fixed, the result
may he inflation. Either scenario
will tend to price the country's goods
out of export markets and increase
its imports. Whatever the channel,
the outcome for the trade balance
is not in doubt: Capital inflows
must lead to trade deficits.

A country that
attracts a lot of foreign
investment will necessarily
run a trade deficit.
balance of payments of any countrythe difference hetween its total sales
to foreigners and its purchases from
foreigners - must always be zero.' Of
course, a country can run a trade
deficit or surplus. That is, it can buy
more goods from foreigners than it
sells or vice versa. But that imbalance must always he matched by a
corresponding imbalance in the capital account. A country that runs a
trade deficit must be selling foreigners more assets than it buys; a country that runs a surplus must be a net
investor abroad. When the United
States buys Japanese automohiles, it
must he selling something in return; it might be Boeing jets, hut it
could also he Rockefeller Center or,
for that matter. Treasury bills. That
is not just an opinion that econo-

42

Consider, for example, Mexico's
recent history. During the 1980s, nobody would invest in Mexico and the
country ran a trade surplus. After
1989, foreign investment poured in
amid new optimism about Mexico's
prospects. Some of that money was

spent on imported equipment for
Mexico's new factories. The rest fueled a domestic boom, which sucked
in imports and caused the peso to
become increasingly overvalued.
That, in turn, discouraged exports
and prompted many Mexican consumers to purchase imported goods.
The result: Massive capital inflows
were matched by equally massive
trade deficits.
Then came the peso crisis of December 1994. Once again, investors
were trying to get out of Mexico, not
in, and the scenario ran in reverse. A
slumping economy redueed the demand for imports, as did a newly
devalued peso. Meanwhile, Mexican
exports surged, helped by a weak
currency. As any economist could
have predicted, the collapse of foreign investment in Mexico has been
matched by an equal and opposite
move of Mexican trade into surplus.
But like the proposition that expanded exports do not mean more
employment, the necessary conclusion that countries attracting foreign
investment typically run trade deficits sits poorly with business audiences. The specific ways in which
foreign investment might worsen
the trade balance seem questionable
to them. Will investors really spend
that much on imported equipment?
How do we know that the currency
will appreciate or that, if it does, exports will decrease and imports will
increase? At the root of the businessperson's skepticism is the failure to understand the force of the accounting, which says that an inflow

HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW

Ianuar>--Ffbruary 1996

W O R L D

V I E W

of capital must - not might - be accompanied by a trade deficit.
In each of the above examples,
there is no question that the economists are right and the businesspeople are wrong. But why do the
arguments that economists find
compelling seem deeply implausihle and even counterintuitive to
businesspeople?
There are two answers to that
question. The shallow answer is that
the experiences of husiness life do
not generally teach practitioners to
look for the principles tbat underlie
economists' arguments. Tbe deeper
answer is that tbe kinds of feedhack
that typically arise in an individual
husiness are both weaker than and
different from the kinds of feedback
that typically arise in the economy
as a whole. Let me analyze each of
these answers in turn.

theory of tbe corporation hut hy
finding the particular product strategies or organizational innovations
that work. There have been some
business greats who have attempted
to codify what they know, but such
attempts have almost always been
disappointing, George Soros's book
told readers very little about how
to be another George
Soros; and many people have pointed out
that Warren Buffett
does not, in practice,
invest the Warren Buffett Way. After all, a finaneial wizard makes
a fortune not hy enunciating general principles of financial markets hut by perceiving particular,
highly specific opportunities a bit
faster than anyone else.

The Parable of the Paralyzed
Centipede

Indeed, great business executives
often seem to do themselves harm
when they try to formalize what
they do, to write it down as a set of
principles. They begin to hehave as
they think they are supposed to,
whereas their previous success was
hased on intuition and a willingness
to innovate. One is reminded of the
old joke about the centipede who
was asked how he managed to coordinate his 100 legs: He started thinking about it and could never walk
properly again.
Yet even if a business leader may
not he very good at formulating general theories or at explaining what
he or she does, there are still those
who believe that the businessper-

Every once in a while, a highly
successful husinessperson writes a
hook about what he or she has
learned. Some of these books are
memoirs: They tell the story of a career through anecdotes. Others are
ambitious efforts to describe the
principles on which the great person's success was hased.
Almost without exception, the
first kind of hook is far more successful than the second, not only in
terms of sales but also in terms of its
reception among serious thinkers.
Why? Because a corporate leader
succeeds not hy developing a general

son's ability to spot opportunities
and solve problems in his or her own
business can be applied to the national economy. After all, what the
president of the United States needs
from his economic advisers is not
learned tracts but sound advice
about what to do next. Why isn't
someone who has shown consistent-

A corporate leader
succeeds by finding the
right strategies, not
by developing a theory of
the corporation.

HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW January-February 1996

ly good judgment in running a business likely to give the president good
advice about running the country?
Because, in short, a country is not a
large company.
Many people have trouble grasping the difference in complexity between even the largest business and
a national economy. The U.S. economy employs 120 million people,
ahout 200 times as many as General
Motors, the largest employer in the
United States, Yet even this 200-to-l
ratio vastly understates the difference in complexity between the
largest husiness organization and
the national economy. A mathematician will tell us that the number of potential interactions among a
large group of people is proportional
to tbe square of their number. Without getting too mystical, it is likely

43

that the U.S. economy is in some
sense not hundreds but tens of thousands of times more complex than
the biggest corporation.
Moreover, there is a sense in
which even very large corporations
are not all that diverse. Most corpo-

tion: consistent accounting, clear
lines of responsibility, and so on.
But many husinesspeople have trouble accepting the relatively handsoff role of a wise economic policymaker. Business executives must be
proactive. It is hard for someone
used to that role to realize how much more difficult - and less necessary-this approach is for
national economic policy.
Consider, for example,
the question of promoting key business areas.
Only an irresponsible
CEO would not try to
determine which new areas were
essential to the company's future;
a CEO who left investment decisions entirely to individual managers running independent profit centers would not be doing the job. But
should a government decide on a list
of key industries and then actively
promote them? Quite aside from
economists' theoretical arguments
against industrial targeting, the simple fact is that governments have
a terrible track record at judging
which industries are likely to be important. At various times, governments have been convinced that
steel, nuclear power, synthetic fuels,
semiconductor memories, and fifthgeneration computers were the wave
of the future. Of course, businesses
make mistakes, too, hut they do not
have the extraordinarily low hatting
average of government because great
husiness leaders have a detailed
knowledge of and feel for their industries that nobody-no matter how
smart-can have for a system as complex as a national economy.

The U.S. economy is the
ultimate conglomerate,
vs^ith tens of thousands of
distinct lines of business.
rations are built around a core competence: a particular technology or
an approach to a particular type of
market. As a result, even a huge corporation that seems to be in many
different businesses tends to be unified by a eentral theme.
The U.S. economy, in eontrast, is
the ultimate nightmare conglomerate, with tens of thousands of utterly
distinct lines of husiness, unified only because they happen to be within
the nation's borders. The experience
of a successful wheat farmer offers
little insight into what works in the
computer industry, which, in turn,
is probably not a very good guide to
successful strategies for a chain of
restaurants.
How, then, can such a complex
entity be managed? A national economy must be run on the basis of general principles, not particular strategies. Consider, for example, the
question of tax policy. Responsible
governments do not impose taxes
targeted at particular individuals or
corporations or offer them special
tax hreaks. In fact, it is rarely a good
idea for governments even to design
tax policy to encourage or discourage particular industries. Instead, a
good tax system obeys the broad
principles developed by fiscal experts over the years - for example,
neutrality between alternative investments, low marginal rates, and
minimal discrimination between
current and future consumption.
Why is that a problem for businesspeople? After all, there are many
general principles that also underlie
the sound management of a corpora44

Still, the idea that the best economic management almost always
consists of setting up a good framework and then leaving it alone
doesn't make sense to businesspeople, whose instinct is, as Ross Perot
put it, to "lift up the hood and get to
work on the engine."

Going Back to School
In the scientific world, the syndrome known as "great man's disease" happens when a famous researcher in one field develops strong
opinions about another field that he

or she does not understand, such as a
chemist who decides that he is an
expert in medicine or a physicist
who decides that he is an expert in
cognitive science. The same syndrome is apparent in some husiness
leaders who have been promoted to
economic advisers: They have trouhle accepting that they must go hack
to school before they can make pronouncements in a new field.
The general principles on which
an economy must be run are different - not harder to understand, but
different-from those that apply to a
business. An executive who is thoroughly comfortable with business
accounting does not automatically
know how to read national income
accounts, which measure different
things and use different concepts.
Personnel management and labor
law are not the same thing; neither
are corporate financial control and
monetary policy. A business leader
who wants to become an economic
manager or expert must learn a new
vocabulary and set of concepts, some
of them unavoidably mathematical.
That is hard for a business leader,
especially one who has been very
suecessful, to accept. Imagine a person who has mastered the complexities of a huge industry, who has run
a multibillion-dollar enterprise. Is
such a person, whose adviee on economic policy may well be sought,
likely to respond by deciding to
spend time reviewing the kind of
material that is covered in freshman
economics courses? Or is he or she
more likely to assume that business
experience is more than enough and
that the unfamiliar words and concepts economists use are nothing
but pretentious jargon?
Of course, in spite of the examples
I gave earlier, many readers may still
believe that the second response is
the more sensible one. Why does
economic analysis require different
concepts, a completely different way
of thinking, than running a husiness? To answer that question, I
must turn to the deeper difference
between good business thinking and
good economic analysis.
The fundamental difference between business strategy and ecocontinued on page 48

HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW January-February iy96

nomic analysis is this: Even the
largest business is a very open system; despite growing world trade,
the U.S. economy is largely a closed
system. Businesspeople are not used
to thinking about closed systems;
economists are.
Let me offer some noneconomic
examples to illustrate the difference
hetween closed and open systems.
Consider solid waste. Every year, the
average American generates about
half a ton of solid waste that cannot
he recycled or burned. What happens
to it? In many communities, it is
sent somewhere else. My town requires that every resident subscribe
to a private disposal service hut provides no landfill site; tbe disposal
service pays a fee to some other community for the right to dump our
garbage. This means tbat tbe garbage
pickup fees are higher than they
would be if the town set aside a landfill site, hut the town government
has made that choice: It is willing to
pay so that it won't have an unsightly dump within its borders.
For an individual town, that
choice is feasible. But could every
town and county in the United
States make the same choice? Could
we all decide to send our garbage
somewhere else? Of course not
(leaving aside the possibility of exporting garbage to the Third World).
For the United States as a whole,
the principle "garbage in, garbage
out" applies literally. The country
can make choices about where to
bury its solid waste but not about
whether to bury it at all. That is, in
terms of solid waste disposal, the
United States is more or less a closed
system, even though each town is an
open system.
That's a fairly obvious example,
Here is another, perhaps less obvious one. At one point in my life, I
was a "park-and-ride" commuter:
Every morning, I would drive to a
large parking garage and then take
public transportation downtown.
Unfortunately, the garage was not
large enough. It consistently filled
up, forcing late commuters to continue driving all tbe way to work, I
soon learned, however, that I could
always find a parking space if I arrived by about 8:15.
48

In this case, each individual commuter constituted an open system:
He or she could find a parking space
by arriving early. But tbe group of
commuters as a whole could not do
the same. If everyone tried to get a
space hy arriving earlier, the garage
would only fill up sooner! Commuters as a group constituted a
closed system, at least as far as parking was concerned.
What does this have to do with
husiness versus economics? Businesses - even very large corporations-are generally open systems.
They can, for example, increase employment in all their divisions simultaneously; they can increase investment across the board; they can
seek a higher share of all their markets, Admittedly, the borders of the
organization are not wide open. A
company may find it difficult to expand rapidly because it cannot attract suitable workers fast enough or
because it is unahle to raise enough
capital. An organization may find it
even more difficult to contract, because it is reluctant to fire good employees. But we find nothing remarkable in a corporation whose
market share doubles or halves in
just a few years.
By contrast, a national economyespecially that of a very large country like the United States-is a closed
system. Could all U.S. companies
double their market shares over the
next ten years?' Certainly not, no
matter how much their managements improved. For
one thing, in spite of
growing world trade,
more than 70% of
U.S. employment and
value-added is in industries, such as retail
trade, that neither export nor face import
competition. In those
industries, one U.S. company can increase its market share only at the
expense of another.

move into trade surplus; and, as we
have already seen, a country tbat
runs a trade surplus is necessarily a
country that exports capital. A little
arithmetic tells us that if the average
U.S. company were to expand its
share of the world market by as little
as five percentage points, the United
States, which is currently a net importer of capital from the rest of the
world, would have to become a net
exporter of capital on a scale never
before seen, if you think this is an
implausible scenario, you must also
believe that U.S. companies cannot
increase tbeir combined share of the
market hy more than a percentage
point or two, no matter how well
run they are.
Businesspeople have trouble with
economic analysis because they are
accustomed to thinking about open
systems. To return to our two examples, a businessperson looks at the
jobs directly created by exports and
sees those as the most important
part of the story. He or she may acknowledge that higher employment
leads to higher interest rates, but
this seems an iffy, marginal concern.
What the economist sees, however,
is that employment is a closed system: Workers who gain johs from increased exports, like park-and-ride
commuters who secure parking
spaces by arriving at the garage early,
must gain those positions at someone else's expense.
And what about the effect of foreign investment on the trade bal-

Will a business leader
vs^ant to revievs^ material
taught in freshman
economics courses?

In industries that do enter into
world trade, U.S. companies as a
group can increase their market
share, but they must do so by either
increasing exports or driving down
imports. Any increase in their market share would therefore mean a

anee? Again, tbe business executive
looks at the direct effects of investment on competition in a partieular
industry; the effects of capital flows
on exchange rates, prices, and so on
do not seem particularly reliable or
important. The economist knows,
however, that the balance of payments is a closed system: Tbe inflow
of capital is always matched hy the

HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW

January-February 1996

W O R L D

trade deficit, so any increase in that
inflow must lead to an increase in
that deficit.

Feedbacks in Business and
Economics
Another way of looking at the difference between companies and
economies may help explain why
great business executives are often
wrong about economics and why
certain economic ideas are more
popular with businesspeople than
others: Open systems like eompanies typically experience a different
kind of feedback than closed systems like economies.
This concept is best explained hy
hypothetical example. Imagine a
company that has two main lines of
business: widgets and gizmos. Sup-

V I E W

effects of the growth of one part of
the company on the success of the
other are both ambiguous in principle and hard to judge in practice;
feedbacks among different lines of
business, whether they involve synergy or competition for resources,
are often elusive.
By eontrast, consider a national
economy that finds one of its major
exports growing rapidly. If that industry increases employment, it
will typically do so at the expense of
other industries. If the country does
not at the same time reduce its inflows of capital, the increase in one
export must be matched by a reduction in other exports or by an increase in imports because of the
balance of payments accounting discussed earlier. That is, there will
most likely be strong
negative feedbacks from
the growth of that export
to employment and exports in other industries.
Indeed, those negative
feedbacks will ordinarily
he so strong tbat they
will more or less completely eliminate any improvements in overall employment
or the trade balance. Why? Because
employment and the balance of payments are closed systems.

Even the largest business is
a very open system;
a national economy is a
closed system.
pose that this company experiences
unexpected growth in its sales of
widgets. How will that growth affect
the sales of the company as a whole?
Will increased widget sales end up
helping or hurting the gizmo business? The answer in many cases will
he that there is not much effect either way. The widget division will
simply hire more workers, the company will raise more capital, and
that will be that.
The story does not necessarily end
here, of course. Expanded widget
sales could either help or hurt the
gizmo husiness in several ways. On
one hand, a profitable widget business could help provide the cash
flow that finances expansion in gizmos; or the experience gained from
success in widgets may he transferable to gizmos; or the growth of the
company may allow R&D efforts
that benefit both divisions. On the
other hand, rapid expansion may
strain the company's resources, so
that the growth of widgets may
come to some extent at the gizmo
division's expense. But such indirect
50

In the open-system world of business, feedbacks are often weak and
almost always uncertain. In the
closed-system world of economics,
feedbacks are often very strong and
very certain. But that is not the
whole difference. The feedbacks in
the business world are often positive; those in the world of eeonomic
policy are usually, though not always, negative.
Again, compare the effects of an
expanding line of business in a corporation and m a national economy.
Success in one line of husiness,
which expands the company's financial, technological, or marketing
base, often helps a company expand
in other lines. That is, a company
that does well in one area may end
up hiring more people in other areas.
But an economy that produces and
sells many goods will normally find
negative feedhacks among economic
sectors: Expansion of one industry

pulls resources of capital and labor
away from other industries.
There are, in fact, examples of positive feedbacks in economics. They
are often evident within a particular
industry or group of related industries, especially if those industries
are geographieally concentrated. For
example, the emergence of London
as a financial center and of Hollywood as an entertainment center are
clearly cases of positive feedback
at work. However, such examples
are usually limited to particular regions or industries; at the level of
the national economy, negative feedback generally prevails. The reason
should be obvious: An individual region or industry is a far more open
system than the economy of the
United States as a whole, let alone
the world economy. An individual
industry or group of industries can
attract workers from other sectors of
the economy; so if an individual industry does well, employment may
increase not only in that industry
but also in related industries, which
may further reinforce the success of
the first industry, and so on. Thus if
one looks at a particular industrial
complex, one may well see positive
feedback at work. But for the economy as a whole, those localized positive feedbacks must he more than
matched by negative feedbacks elsewhere. Extra resources pulled into
any one industry or cluster of industries must come from somewhere,
which means from other industries.
Businesspeople are not accustomed to or comfortable with the
idea of a system in which there are
strong negative feedbacks. In particular, they are not at all comfortable
with the way in which effects that
seem weak and uneertain from the
point of view of an individual company or industry - such as the effect
of reduced hiring on average wages
or of increased foreign investment
on the exchange rate - become crucially important when one adds up
the impact of policies on the national economy as a whole.

What's a President to Do?
In a society that respects business
success, political leaders will inevitably - and rightly - seek the ad-

HARVARiD BUSINESS REVIEW

January-February 1996

vice of husiness leaders on many issues, particularly those that involve
money. All we can ask is that both
the advisers and the advisees have a
proper sense of what business success does and does not teach about
economic policy.
In 1930, as the world slid into depression, John Maynard Keynes
called for a massive monetary expansion to alleviate the crisis and
pleaded for a policy hased on economic analysis rather than on the
advice of hankers committed to the
gold standard or manufacturers who
wanted to raise prices by restricting
output. "For-though no one will believe it - economics is a technical
and difficult subject,'" Had his advice been followed, the worst ravages of the Depression might have
been avoided.
Keynes was right: Economics is a
difficult and technical suhject. It is
no harder to be a good economist
than it is to be a good business executive, (In fact, it is probably easier,
because the competition is less intense,) However, economics and
business are not the same suhject,
and mastery of one does not ensure
comprehension, let alone mastery,
of the other. A successful business
leader is no more likely to be an
expert on economics than on military strategy.
The next time you hear husinesspeople propounding their views
about the economy, ask yourself.
Have they taken the time to study
this suhject? Have they read what
the experts write? if not, never mind
how successful they have been in
husiness. Ignore them, because they
probably have no idea what they are
talking ahout.
1. There are actually two tecbnical i
tioos to this statement. One of them involves
what are known as "unrequited transfers":
gifts, foreign aid, and so {)n. The other involves
profits and interest payments from past investments. These qualifications do not change the
main point.
2. Strictly speaking, one should talk of companies that produce in the United States. It is certainly possihle for companies based in the
United States to increase their world market
share hy acquiring foreign suhsidiaries.
3. "The Great Slump of 1930," reprinted in
Essays in Permasion (New York: Norton, 1963).

Reprint 96108

Forget EPS, ROE and ROI.
EVAls What Drives
Stock Prices.

Look what happens whm a compcm)' adopls EVA
EVA® — Economic Value Added — is a
financial tool that tells you how much your
company is beating the total cost of capital,
and what to do about it if you're not.
EVA is also a performance measurement
tbat best accounts for changes in share
value. Why? Because what drives a company's share price is the amount by which
earnings, properly measured, exceed or fall
short of the cost of the capital required to
produce those earnings. That's precisely
what EVA shows you.
•'We calcukited our EVA hack to 1984
and found an aln?ost perfect correlation
uitb stock price." siiysJmiK'^Uiienim.CFO oi
Communications Services at AT&T.
EVA is your company's after tax profits
from operations less the cost of all capital
employed to produce those profits: not just
the cost of debt, but the cost of equity capital as well. When EVA is used as part of a
total financial management system, it can
help shape ever\' corporate decision, from a
company acquisition or divestiture to project budgeting, product development..,even
incentive compensation.
More and more companies such as
Equifax and Briggs & Stratton are using EVA

to guide their decision making. If you're not
using EVA to help you decide whether to buy a
competitor, sell a division or build a new plant,
then how can you be sure your decisions are
maximizing your shareholder value?
Wovt am you be sure?
You can turn to the corporate advisory
firm that developed EVA, Stern Stewart & Co.
can do for you what we have done tor dozens
of Fortune 500 companies and scores of others. Our EVA'' financial management service
can give you the tools and training to integrate an EVA management framework into
your corporate culture.
Just measuring EVA isn't enough. You
need to adopt it. EVA brings a new kind of
financial discipline to companies, it encourages managei^ to act like owners and boosts
shareholder fortunes in the process,
EVA® — The Real Key to Creating
Wealth'"' For more information, contact
AlEhrbar at (212) 261-0748.
•••'-j',i

Stern Stewart & Co.
THE EVA''COMPANY

e All ri^Lsre*rwdforStem Sitwart S (ji. KVA* a 3 ivgislmid trademaA nf Stem Stewan & Co, jn the I^S and Moxi

