Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I

Tatsunori Seki    Kazunobu Sawamoto
Jack M. Parent    Arturo Alvarez‑Buylla
●

●

Editors

Neurogenesis
in the Adult Brain I
Neurobiology

Editors
Tatsunori Seki, Ph.D.
Professor
Department of Histology
and Neuroanatomy
Tokyo Medical University
Tokyo 160-8402, Japan
sekit@tokyo-med.ac.jp
Jack M. Parent, M.D.
Associate Professor
Department of Neurology
University of Michigan
109 Zina Pitcher Place 5021 BSRB
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
parent@umich.edu

Kazunobu Sawamoto, Ph.D.
Professor
Department of Developmental
and Regenerative Biology
Institute of Molecular Medicine
Nagoya City University Graduate
School of Medical Sciences
1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku
Nagoya 467-8601, Japan
sawamoto@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp
Arturo Alvarez-Buylla, Ph.D.
Professor
Department of Neurosurgery
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
abuylla@stemcell.ucsf.edu

ISBN 978‑4‑431‑53932‑2
e-ISBN 978‑4‑431‑53933‑9
DOI 10.1007/978‑4‑431‑53933‑9
Springer Tokyo Dordrecht Heidelberg London New York
Library of Congress Control Number: 2011928783
© Springer 2011
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is
concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting,
reproduction on microfilm or in any other way, and storage in data banks.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, etc. in this publication does not
imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective
laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
Product liability: The publishers cannot guarantee the accuracy of any information about dosage and
application contained in this book. In every individual case the user must check such information by
consulting the relevant literature.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

Preface

The phenomenon of adult neurogenesis, or persistent generation of neurons in the
adult brain, is attracting more and more attention every day. Adult neurogenesis has
become increasingly important to studies of brain development and diseases, learning
and memory, and aging. A considerable number of papers on the mechanism of
adult neurogenesis or linking this process to various physiological and pathological
events are published monthly. Most recent popular textbooks in the neurosciences
also provide ample coverage of basic principles of adult neurogenesis, a topic which
just 20 or 30 years ago was considered tangential, controversial, or unimportant.
The discovery that some populations of neurons continue to be produced post‑
natally has dramatically changed previous fundamental concepts of neuroscience.
For example, it was widely believed that once development is complete and the
embryonic and fetal scaffolding for neuronal generation, migration, and integration
are dismantled, these processes cannot be reenacted; therefore, once neurons die
they never regenerate. This dogma has been overturned, and studies on adult neuro‑
genesis have opened up the possibility of newborn neurons participating in brain
tissue repair and processes of learning and memory. Investigations of adult neuro‑
genesis have also led to basic new principles on the identity of neural stem cells, the
function of transit amplifying progenitors, and new forms of neuronal migration.
Furthermore, some neuropsychiatric disorders are suspected to be associated with
defects in adult neurogenesis.
Despite the existence of such a broadly applicable and fundamentally important
phenomenon, 20 years ago only a few groups in the world studied adult neurogen‑
esis. It was the pioneering [3H]-thymidine autoradiography studies of Joseph
Altman that showed in the 1960s how newborn neurons continue to be formed post‑
natally in the rodent hippocampus and olfactory bulb. Adult neurogenesis, however,
did not become widely accepted and remained a controversial field for more than a
decade. In the 1980s a series of rigorous studies, inspired by the neurobiology of
song learning in birds, led Fernando Nottebohm and his group to demonstrate the
origin, migration, and recruitment of new neurons in song-control nuclei and the
rest of the telencephalon of adult canaries. Unfortunately, the history of the field is
either ignored or underappreciated by the many neuroscientists who are now interested
in or working on adult neurogenesis. To redress that, this book contains historically
crucial and memorable articles by Drs. Altman and Nottebohm describing from a
v

vi

Preface

very personal perspective the motivations and excitement that triggered these seminal
discoveries. They also highlight some of the scientific and funding challenges posed
by the strong early opposition to adult ­neurogenesis. Their two articles should not
only be the primary source for ­neuroscientists interested in the initial discoveries in
adult neurogenesis and how they came about, but should also be of value to those
interested in science history, funding, and policy.
Novel methods for labeling new neurons – new thymidine analogs such as BrdU,
immunohistochemical markers for immature neurons, retrovirus and genetic tagging
techniques – resulted in the 1990s in an explosion of studies on the mechanism and func‑
tion of adult neurogenesis. Stunningly beautiful preparations revealed the entire process
of neuronal formation in the adult and revealed the nature and connectivity of individual
newly formed neurons. Physiological studies have begun to decipher the unique
­contribution of new neurons to adult neural circuits. Despite the enormous progress
made over the past decade, it is clear that we are still in the early days of understanding
the functional meaning and molecular mechanisms of adult neurogenesis. In prepara‑
tion for this next stage of discovery, we thought it was fitting to compile a collection
of thoughtful reviews from leading laboratories working in this area of research.
Contributing researchers describe their current work in 27 chapters that are
grouped into two volumes, which cover a wide array of topics concerning adult
neurogenesis. The first volume, in addition to the two articles by Drs. Altman and
Nottebohm on the history of adult neurogenesis, comprises a comprehensive pre‑
sentation of the basic biology of adult neurogenesis: basic aspects of neurogenesis,
adult neurogenesis in non-mammalian vertebrates, in the mammalian hippocampus
and olfactory bulb. In the second volume, clinical implications of adult neuro‑
genesis are considered, including neurogenesis in the adult monkey and human
brain, Parkinson’s disease, epilepsy, stress, depression, schizophrenia, stroke, brain
injury, and neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric pathology.
A small research group in Japan, the Adult Neurogenesis Kondankai (Conference),
working on various aspects of adult neurogenesis initially conceived these volumes.
Later, two new editors (A.A.-B. and J.M.P.) joined the project and the original idea
was expanded and appropriately shaped. Our goal is not only to ­provide a compre‑
hensive knowledge base on adult neurogenesis, but also to share our excitement and
motivation for an extraordinary field in the neurosciences. We believe that these
ingredients will be fundamental to future research in this exciting field towards a
better understanding of how adult neurogenesis is maintained and regulated, and
how it contributes to plasticity and possibly one day to brain therapy.
During the editing of these two volumes, a massive 9.0-magnitude earthquake
struck northeastern Japan on March 11, 2011, and tens of thousands of people
died in the resulting tsunami. We dedicate this book to their memory, and offer our
deepest condolences to those who lost loved ones.
Tatsunori Seki
Kazunobu Sawamoto
Jack M. Parent
Arturo Alvarez-Buylla

Contents

Part I  History
  1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis..............................	
Joseph Altman
  2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal
Replacement in Adult Brain...................................................................	
Fernando Nottebohm

3

47

Part II  Basic Aspects of Neurogenesis
  3  Fate Specification of Neural Stem Cells.................................................	
Masakazu Namihira and Kinichi Nakashima

87

  4  Fractones: Home and Conductors of the Neural
Stem Cell Niche........................................................................................	 109
Frederic Mercier, Jason Schnack,
and Maureen Saint Georges Chaumet
Part III  Adult Neurogenesis in Non-mammalian Vertebrates
  5  Adult Neurogenesis in Teleost Fish.........................................................	 137
Günther K.H. Zupanc
  6  Adult Neurogenesis in Reptiles...............................................................	 169
Susana González-Granero, Melissa Lezameta,
and José Manuel García-Verdugo
Part IV  Adult Neurogenesis in the Hippocampus
  7  From Embryonic to Adult Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus...........	 193
Tatsunori Seki

vii

viii

Contents

  8  Activity-Dependent Regulation of the Early Phase
of Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis.....................................................	 217
Tatsuhiro Hisatsune, Yoko Ide, and Rokuya Nochi
  9  Integration of New Neurons into the Adult Hippocampus..................	 237
Wei Deng, Chunmei Zhao, and Fred H. Gage
10  Adult Neurogenesis in the Hippocampus:
Lessons from Natural Populations.........................................................	 257
Jan Martin Wojtowicz
11  Regulation of Adult Neurogenesis by Environment
and Learning............................................................................................	 271
Gerd Kempermann
Part V  Adult Neurogenesis in the Olfactory Bulb
12  Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic Germinal Niches..........	 287
Zaman Mirzadeh, Young-Goo Han, José Manuel García-Verdugo,
and Arturo Alvarez-Buylla
13  Neurogenesis in the Adult Rabbit: From Olfactory
System to Cerebellum..............................................................................	 319
Giovanna Ponti, Federico Luzzati, Paolo Peretto, and Luca Bonfanti
14  Neuronal Migration in the Adult Brain.................................................	 337
Masato Sawada, Shi-hui Huang, Yuki Hirota, Naoko Kaneko,
and Kazunobu Sawamoto
15  Development and Survival of Adult-Born Olfactory Neurons.............	 357
Masahiro Yamaguchi
16  Wiring New Neurons with Old Circuits.................................................	 371
Pierre-Marie Lledo
17  Control of Adult-Born Neuron Production
by Converging GABA and Glutamate Signals......................................	 395
Jean-Claude Platel and Angélique Bordey
Index..................................................................................................................	 407

Contents of Volume II

  1  Neurogenesis in Monkey and Human Adult Brain...............................	
Andréanne Bédard, Patrick J. Bernier, and André Parent

1

  2  Adult Neurogenesis in Parkinson’s Disease...........................................	
Hideki Mochizuki

23

  3  Adult Neurogenesis in Epilepsy..............................................................	
Sebastian Jessberger and Jack M. Parent

37

  4  Stress Disorders........................................................................................	
Muriel Koehl, Michel Le Moal, and Djoher Nora Abrous

53

  5  Depression.................................................................................................	
Shin Nakagawa and Ronald S. Duman

99

  6  Impaired Neurogenesis as a Risk Factor for Schizophrenia
and Related Mental Diseases..................................................................	 109
Noriko Osumi and Nannan Guo
  7  Neurogenesis from Endogenous Neural Stem Cells
After Stroke: A Future Therapeutic Target to Promote
Functional Restoration?..............................................................................	 133
Olle Lindvall and Zaal Kokaia
  8  Perspectives of “PUFA-GPR40 Signaling” Crucial
for Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis....................................................	 149
Tetsumori Yamashima
  9  Adult Neurogenesis and Neuronal Subtype Specification
in the Neocortex.......................................................................................	 173
Noriyuki Kishi, U. Shivraj Sohur, Jason G. Emsley,
and Jeffrey D. Macklis

ix

x

Contents of Volume II

10  Culturing Adult Neural Stem Cells: Application to the Study
of Neurodegenerative and Neuropsychiatric Pathology.......................	 189
Seiji Hitoshi, Tod Kippin, and Derek van der Kooy
Index..................................................................................................................	 209

Contributors

Joseph Altman (Chapter 1)
8518 SW 86th Terrace, Ocala, FL, USA
Arturo Alvarez-Buylla (Chapter 12)
Department of Neurosurgery, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
and
Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
University of California, San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, Room HSW-1201,
Campus Box 0525, San Francisco, CA 94143-0525, USA
Luca Bonfanti (Chapter 13)
Department of Veterinary Morphophysiology, University of Turin, Turin, Italy
and
National Institute of Neuroscience-Italy (INN), Turin, Italy
and
Istituto scientifico Fondazione Cavalieri Ottolenghi, Turin, Italy
Angélique Bordey (Chapter 17)
Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine,
333 Cedar Street, FMB 422, New Haven, CT 06520-8082, USA
and
Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale University School of
Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, FMB 422, New Haven, CT 06520-8082, USA
Maureen Saint Georges Chaumet (Chapter 4)
Department of Tropical Medicine, Medical Microbiology and Pharmacology,
John A, Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu,
HI 96822, USA
Wei Deng (Chapter 9)
Laboratory of Genetics, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA

xi

xii

Contributors

Fred H. Gage (Chapter 9)
Laboratory of Genetics, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
José Manuel García-Verdugo (Chapters 6 and 12)
Laboratorio de Morfología Celular, Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe,
Valencia, Spain
and
CIBERNED, Spain
Susana González-Granero (Chapter 6)
Unidad de Neurobiología Comparada, Instituto Cavanilles de Biodiversidad y
Biología Evolutiva, Universidad de Valencia, c/ Catedrático José Beltrán nº2,
CP 46980 Paterna, Valencia, Spain
Young-Goo Han (Chapter 12)
Department of Neurosurgery, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
and
Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
University of California, San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue,
Room HSW-1201, Campus Box 0525, San Francisco, CA 94143-0525, USA
Yuki Hirota (Chapter 14)
Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Institute of Molecular
Medicine, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan
Tatsuhiro Hisatsune (Chapter 8)
Department of Integrated Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa,
Chiba 277-8562, Japan
Shi-hui Huang (Chapter 14)
Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Institute of Molecular
Medicine, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan
Yoko Ide (Chapter 8)
Department of Integrated Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa,
Chiba 277-8562, Japan
Naoko Kaneko (Chapter 14)
Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Institute of Molecular
Medicine, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan

Contributors

xiii

Gerd Kempermann (Chapter 11)
Genomics of Regeneration, CRTD – Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden,
DFG Forschungszentrum und Excellenzcluster, Tatzberg 47 – 49, 01307 Dresden,
Germany
Melissa Lezameta (Chapter 6)
Unidad de Neurobiología Comparada, Instituto Cavanilles de Biodiversidad y
Biología Evolutiva, Universidad de Valencia, c/ Catedrático José Beltrán nº2,
CP 46980 Paterna, Valencia, Spain
Pierre-Marie Lledo (Chapter 16)
Laboratory for Perception and Memory, Department of Neuroscience,
Institut Pasteur, 75015 Paris, France
and
CNRS, URA2182, 75015 Paris, France
Federico Luzzati (Chapter 13)
Department of Animal and Human Biology, University of Turin, Turin, Italy
and
Istituto scientifico Fondazione Cavalieri Ottolenghi, Turin, Italy
Frederic Mercier (Chapter 4)
Department of Tropical Medicine, Medical Microbiology and Pharmacology,
John A, Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822,
USA
Zaman Mirzadeh (Chapter 12)
Department of Neurosurgery, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
and
Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
University of California, San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, Room HSW-1201,
Campus Box 0525, San Francisco, CA 94143-0525, USA
Kinichi Nakashima (Chapter 3)
Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, Graduate School of Biological Sciences,
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, 8916-5 Takayama-cho,
Ikoma 630-0101, Japan
Masakazu Namihira (Chapter 3)
Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, Graduate School of Biological Sciences,
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, 8916-5 Takayama-cho,
Ikoma 630-0101, Japan
Rokuya Nochi (Chapter 8)
Department of Integrated Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa,
Chiba 277-8562, Japan

xiv

Contributors

Fernando Nottebohm (Chapter 2)
The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA
Paolo Peretto (Chapter 13)
Department of Animal and Human Biology, University of Turin, Turin, Italy
and
National Institute of Neuroscience-Italy (INN), Turin, Italy
and
Istituto scientifico Fondazione Cavalieri Ottolenghi, Turin, Italy
Jean-Claude Platel (Chapter 17)
Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar
Street, FMB 422, New Haven, CT 06520-8082, USA
and
Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale University School of
Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, FMB 422, New Haven, CT 06520-8082, USA
Giovanna Ponti (Chapter 13)
Department of Veterinary Morphophysiology, University of Turin, Turin, Italy
and
Istituto scientifico Fondazione Cavalieri Ottolenghi, Turin, Italy
Masato Sawada (Chapter 14)
Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Institute of Molecular
Medicine, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan
Kazunobu Sawamoto (Chapter 14)
Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Institute of Molecular
Medicine, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan
Jason Schnack (Chapter 4)
Department of Tropical Medicine, Medical Microbiology and Pharmacology,
John A, Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822,
USA
Tatsunori Seki (Chapter 7)
Department of Histology and Neuroanatomy, Tokyo Medical University,
Tokyo 160-8402, Japan
Jan Martin Wojtowicz (Chapter 10)
Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Masahiro Yamaguchi (Chapter 15)
Department of Physiology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

Contributors

xv

Chunmei Zhao (Chapter 9)
Laboratory of Genetics, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
Günther K.H. Zupanc (Chapter 5)
Department of Biology, Northeastern University, 134 Mugar Life Science
Building, 360 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA

Part I

History

Chapter 1

The Discovery of Adult Mammalian
Neurogenesis*
Joseph Altman

Abstract  Visualizing proliferating cells with 3H-thymidine autoradiography,
we discovered in the early 1960s that the microneurons (granule cells) of the
hippocampal dentate gyrus and the olfactory bulb continue to be produced through
adulthood. We later demonstrated that the precursors of hippocampal granule cells
proliferate in the dentate subgranular zone, and that this secondary germinal matrix
is far more prominent in a carnivore (young cats) than in rodents (rats and guinea
pigs). By destroying these proliferating precursor cells with low-level X-rays, we
prepared rats that lacked 85% of the normal complement of granule cells, the
same proportion that we found to be generated postnatally with quantitative histo­
logy and autoradiography. Behavioral tests established that these “degranulated”
rats displayed abnormalities comparable to those following extensive hippocampal
lesions. We also showed that the granule cells of the olfactory bulb are generated
in the persisting subependymal layer of the anterior forebrain and migrate to the
olfactory bulb by way of a hitherto unidentified structure, the rostral migratory
stream. We discuss why the neuroscience community may have refused to accept
these multipronged demonstrations and our laboratory lost its public financing by
the mid-1980s.

1.1 Serendipity
Although I decided to become (what is now called) a neuroscientist as a teenager
in the early 1940s, and pursued that ambition through difficult times with a
pretty clear idea what I hoped to accomplish, the problem of neurogenesis was
not the subject I was planning to study. My original idea was to seek a better
understanding of human behavior, observing it at its worse in the terrible times

* Manuscript submitted in its present format on January 23, 2008.
J. Altman (*)
8518 SW 86th Terrace, Ocala, FL, USA
e-mail: bayeraltman@earthlink.net
T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_1, © Springer 2011

3

4

J. Altman

I lived, and thought that the best approach to that was to study experimentally
the neural foundations of the psychological mechanisms that guide behavior.
After engaging in an informal and formal “armchair” study of various topics in
human and animal behavior, it was in the late 1950s that I succeeded in getting
predoctoral training in neurophysiological techniques (working at Mount Sinai
Hospital in New York City with the neurosurgeon, Leonard Malis) and postdoctoral training in neuroanatomy (working at the College of Physicians and
Surgeons of Columbia University with Malcolm Carpenter). That work led to
articles I published on the ascending and descending connections of the feline
superior colliculus, and the physiological properties of single collicular neurons.
I also published papers on certain facets of the visual behavior (locomotor activity,
day–night activity cycle, light aversion) of rats with stereotaxic lesions of the
superior colliculus.
While I received my neurophysiological and neuroanatomical training, I also
began exploratory work on mapping regional differences in the protein metabolism
of the brain following visual stimulation and induced motor activity. The first of
these exploratory studies was carried out in collaboration with the neurochemist,
Abel Lajtha, who at that time worked at the College of Physicians and Surgeons.
We covered one eye of newly hatched chicks, and placed the animals overnight into
a box lined with flashing Christmas tree bulbs. The next morning the chicks were
injected with a 14C-labeled amino acid and, after a short interval, their brains were
removed and the rate of incorporation of the amino acid into a protein fraction was
compared in the two dissected optic lobes (the avian homologue of the superior
colliculus). The preliminary studies (which we did not think merited publication)
suggested a higher rate of protein metabolism in the optic tectum contralateral to
the stimulated eye. In the next study, which I carried out in a small laboratory I was
establishing at the New York University Medical School, I turned to the use of the
novel autoradiographic technique to determine if differences could be obtained in
the optic pathways of adult pigeons whose one eye was either blindfolded or
removed before the systemic administration of 3H-glycine. While I could not detect
laterality differences in the optic pathways in the unilaterally blindfolded pigeons,
there were profound differences in the uptake of the radiochemical in the optic tract
and the stratum opticum of the optic lobe of the enucleated pigeons contralateral to
the removed eye (Altman and Altman 1962). I also observed that the elevated
protein metabolism in the affected optic pathway was associated with an increase
in the total number of glial cells.
After moving to MIT, I began the autoradiographic approach to the study of
brain–behavior relationships by first mapping the regional pattern of CNS
protein metabolism in rats injected intraperitoneally with 3H-leucine (Altman
1963a). The quantitative microdensitometric results indicated bilaterally consistent
differences in regional label density in various regions throughout the neuraxis.
Using the same approach, I also observed elevated uptake of 3H-leucine in motor
neurons of the spinal cord in rats that were forced to run at a comfortable speed
in a motor-driven activity wheel in comparison with resting rats and rats that

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

5

were injected with the radiochemical some time after they stopped running
(Altman 1963b). In another study with Gopal Das (who joined my laboratory as
a graduate student), we observed increased uptake of 3H-leucine in the degenerating optic tract of unilaterally enucleated adult rats in combination with a great
increase in the concentration of glial cells (Altman and Das 1964a). However,
I was troubled by the inconsistent finding of increased protein metabolism with
motor activation but not with visual stimulation, the relative non-specificity of
amino acid uptake by single neurons in the exercised rats (such as increases in
sensory structures), and by the great variability in individual animals. Accordingly,
in an attempt to improve the autoradiographic technique, I also experimented
with a more selective radioactive marker than amino acids, i.e., 3H-thymidine.
I used the latter to investigate the cellular dynamics of the lesion-induced glial
proliferation that we observed histologically with labeled amino acids. Thymidine
is the selective and metabolically stable precursor of DNA, and it is incorporated
into the nucleus of a cell in large quantities only when the cell is undergoing
division. (The early evidence was reviewed in Altman 1969b.) Using
3
H-thymidine, I expected to tag the newly forming reactive glial cells. In a pilot
study, I made stereotaxic lesions in the lateral geniculate body of rats and
concurrently injected a small dose of 3H-thymidine into the lesion site (Altman
1962a). Pairs of animals were then killed 1 day, 1 week, 2 weeks, and 2 months
after the operation. The observations revealed that the concentration of intensely
labeled proliferating glial cells was highest in those animals that survived for
1 day after 3H-thymidine administration but declined thereafter; however, the
number of lightly-labeled cells increased up to 1 month after the injection. This
suggested continued division of the already labeled glial cells as a facet of the
degenerative and/or regenerative process. Labeled (newly-formed) astrocytes
and microglia predominated around the lesion site whereas labeled oligodendrocytes were most numerous in the fiber tracts associated with the damaged lateral
geniculate body.
While these results were expected, I was surprised and confused to find a small
number of neurons that appeared to be labeled at sites not connected with the
lateral geniculate body (Altman 1962b). Is it possible that new neurons are
formed in the adult mammalian brain? To clarify this I subsequently injected
3
H-thymidine intraperitoneally into normal adult rats and cats (Altman 1963c).
In the rats, the autoradiograms showed a variable number of labeled glia cells
throughout the brain and spinal cord, and a high concentration of labeled cells in
the subependymal layer in the roof of the anterior horn of the lateral ventricle
(Fig. 1.1). In addition, radioactive labeling was consistently present in all of the
sections over a few granule cells in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus
(Fig. 1.2). In the cats, likewise, there were many labeled glial cells; but, in addition,
the nuclei of some small cortical neurons also appeared to be labeled (Fig. 1.3).
However, I argued that labeling in the latter (but not in the dentate granule cells)
might have been due to the tagging of proliferating perineuronal glia in close
proximity of neurons.

Fig. 1.1  Autoradiogram showing labeled cells in the subependymal layer of the forebrain of an
adult rat that was injected intraperitoneally with a single dose of 3H-thymidine (flash labeling)
2 weeks before it was sacrificed. Reproduction of Fig. 5 in Altman (1963c)

Fig. 1.2  Autoradiogram of labeled granule cells near the hilus of the hippocampal dentate gyrus
of an adult rat that was injected intraperitoneally with 3H-thymidine and was killed 2 weeks afterwards. Reproduction of Figs. 13–15 in Altman (1963c)

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

7

Fig. 1.3  Upper panel. Autoradiograms of apparently labeled neocortical (lateral gyrus) neuron
nuclei in an adult cat that was injected intraventricularly with 3H-thymidine. Lower panel.
Autoradiogram to illustrate the possibility that in the 7  mm-thick sections used, the labeling of
some of the neurons may have come from closely apposed perineuronal glia. Reproduction
of Figs. 20–25 and 32 in Altman (1963c)

8

J. Altman

1.2 Systematic Investigation of Postnatal and Adult
Gliogenesis and Neurogenesis
1.2.1 From Exploratory to Systematic Investigations
of Postnatal Neurogenesis
The initial studies that I carried out at MIT were supported by grants to the
Psychology Department (headed by Hans-Lukas Teuber). But in short order I was
fortunate to be awarded several research grants to establish an independent laboratory. The first award I received was from the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, as
part of its program for the peaceful use of radioisotopes. Thereafter, the laboratory
received generous research grants from the National Institute of Mental Health and
the National Science Foundation. I was also fortunate in having from the outset the
technical help of Elizabeth Altman and William J. Anderson, and in succession
the cooperation of Gopal D. Das, several undergraduate and graduate students, and
some postdoctoral fellows.
One of our first studies with 3H-thymidine autoradiography dealt with the
problem of adult gliogenesis. Since perineuronal glia are involved in the metabolism and functions of neurons, and perifascicular glia may play a role in the electrical
conduction of nerve fibers, we posed the question: Might glial proliferation in the
adult brain play some role in brain functions associated with behavioral activation
and learning? To that effect we compared the rate of glial proliferation in the brains
of adult rats that were raised in “impoverished” or “enriched” environments
(Altman and Das 1964b). The impoverished rats were reared in isolation in a small
cage with opaque walls and devoid of any manipulable objects. The enriched rats
lived communally in a large multilevel enclosure where access to food, water, and
other amenities was changed every second or third day. This required the animals
to climb or jump from one floor to another, move through difficult passageways,
run in an activity wheel, and engage in some other skilled activities. While the body
weight of the exercising rats was consistently below the isolated rats, the brain weight
of the enriched animals turned out to be higher when killed at 4.5 months of age.
Moreover, there was a great increase in the number of 3H-thymidine-labeled glia
cells in all neocortical areas in the enriched rats when compared with the impoverished rats. This suggested higher rate of glial proliferation in the behaviorally more
active animals. Another study dealt with possible differences in the proportion of
newly formed dentate granule cells in the hippocampus between enriched and
impoverished rats. However, due to serious ethical problems with the student
involved in this study, we opted not to publish the results.
We followed these exploratory studies by a large-scale, normative histological
and autoradiographic investigation of postnatal neurogenesis. In the first phase of
this research (carried out for several years at MIT and continued from 1968 onward
at Purdue University) we paid particular attention to postnatal neurogenesis in
three brain regions with a cortical organization: the cerebellum, the hippocampus,
and the cerebrum including the olfactory bulb (Altman and Das 1965a,b, 1966;

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

9

Altman 1966a, 1969a,b). Large groups of rats ranging in age from neonates to
adults were injected intraperitoneally with 3H-thymidine and killed at intervals
ranging from 2  h (short-survival), several days (intermediate survival), up to 8
months (long survival). The analysis of short-survival autoradiograms showed that
the proliferating cells of the external germinal layer of the cerebellum are consistently labeled with 3H-thymidine in up to postnatal day 21 (when this layer disappears). Sequential- and long-survival autoradiograms showed that the labeled cells
migrate into the granular and molecular layers where they differentiate as the
microneurons of the cerebellar cortex: the granule, basket, and stellate cells.
In contrast to the limitation of postnatal cerebellar neurogenesis to the juvenile
period, hippocampal neurogenesis was found to persist through adulthood (Altman
and Das 1965a,b). In short-survival autoradiograms, heavily labeled small and dark
precursor cells were located at all ages (albeit in decreasing numbers in older
animals) in the subgranular zone and hilus of the dentate gyrus (Fig. 1.4, top). After
longer survival, the heavily and lightly labeled cells were identified as typical
granule cells of the dentate gyrus (Fig.  1.4, bottom). Observations revealed
that the differentiating granule cells settle in a regular order in the granular layer,
with the early-differentiating (heavily labeled) neurons positioned superficially,
and the later-generated neurons (lightly labeled due to the dilution of the
radiochemical after repeated multiplication) inside near the hilus (Fig.  1.5).
Quantitative studies established that the number of undifferentiated precursor cells
increased up to postnatal day 15, and then declined, whereas the number of differentiated granule cells began to increase by day 8 and remained very high as late
300 days (Fig.  1.6). In adult rats injected with 3H-thymidine the percentage of
labeled precursor cells was highest 4 days after injection and declined by 2 weeks;
in contrast, the percentage of labeled granule cells remained relatively constant up
to 8 months after injection (Fig. 1.7). With reference to the reduction in the addition
of granule cells to the dentate gyrus as a function of age, a sharp decline was noted
in the number of and percentage of labeled granule cells between days 10 and 30,
and a steady decline between days 30 and 240 (Fig. 1.8). Finally, in an attempt to
determine whether postnatal hippocampal neurogenesis is something unique to
altricial rats (rodents with a relatively short period of intrauterine development), we
also studied postnatal neurogenesis in the precocial guinea pig, a rodent with a
prolonged fetal life (Altman and Das 1967), and in a carnivore, the cat. Importantly,
we found that the subgranular zone containing the proliferating precursors of
dentate granule cells is more prominent in the guinea pig than in the rat and, even
more so, in the cat (Figs. 1.9 and 1.10). The postnatal production of hippocampal
granule cells appeared to be a general phenomenon in mammals.
Shirley Bayer joined our laboratory in 1970. As the first step in preparation for her
scientific career, she undertook a quantitative assessment of the proportion of dentate
granule cells acquired during the postnatal period (Bayer and Altman 1974, 1975).
Using a procedure that we called the “progressively delayed cumulative labeling
technique,” we administered 3H-thymidine daily to large groups of rats on postnatal
days 0–3, 4–7, 8–11, 12–15 and 16–19, and sacrificed the animals at 60 days. In this
procedure, which labels virtually all the proliferating cells of the developing brain,

10

J. Altman

Fig. 1.4  Top. Autoradiogram of labeled cells in the hippocampal subgranular zone and hilus of a rat
pup repeatedly injected with 3H-thymidine on the fifths, sixth, seventh and eighth days (cumulative
labeling), and killed on the ninth day. Note the relative thinness of the dentate gyrus at this age with
many unlabeled precursor cells and a few labeled granule cells. Bottom. Autoradiogram of labeled
“deep” granule cells (near the hilus) in a rat injected with 3H-thymidine on postnatal day 10 (flash
labeling) and killed 2 months later. Note the high proportion of unlabeled “superficial” granule cells.
These are assumed to have been generated before postnatal day 10. Reproduction of Fig.  21 in
Altman (1966a), and Fig. 1A (flipped) in Altman and Das (1965a)

instead of counting the labeled dentate granule cells, she counted the percentages of
unlabeled cells and labeled cells as a function of advancing postnatal age, on the
assumption that the unlabeled cells are those that differentiated (became postmitotic)
before the injection. The results indicated that, as judged by the labeling pattern at

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

11

Fig. 1.5  Autoradiograms showing the outside-in pattern of settling of the postnatally generated
granule cells. Top. Labeling pattern of dentate granule cells in a young-adult rat that was
injected with a single dose of 3H-thymidine on postnatal day 2 and killed 2 months later. Note
that the outermost granule cells are unlabeled. These are the granule cells that were generated
before the injection. The next row of heavily labeled cells are the progeny of precursor cells
that differentiated (became postmitotic) soon after the injection. The lightly labeled granule
cells below them were generated later, as indicated by the dilution of the administered radioactive thymidine, as the daughter cells underwent further divisions before differentiation.
Bottom. Pattern of granule cell labeling in a rat that was injected on postnatal day 13 and killed
2 months later. Note that the earlier generated outer granule cells are unlabeled, and heavily
and lightly labeled granule cells are confined to the deep row close to the hilus. Arrows point
the small, dark precursor cells of the subgranular zone. Reproduction of Figs.  34 and 35 in
Altman (1966a)

12

J. Altman

Fig. 1.6  Number of undifferentiated precursor cells and of differentiated granule cells in 25 mm2
sample areas in the hippocampal dentate gyrus, as a function of age. Note the great increase in the
number of granule cells from the second week onward. Reproduction of Fig. 7B in Altman and
Das (1965a)

Fig. 1.7  Percentage of
labeled precursor cells and
granule cells in the hippocampal dentate gyrus of rats
injected with 3H-thymidine as
adults (4 months) and survived
for periods ranging from 4
days to 8 months.
Reproduction of Fig. 5 in
Altman and Das (1965a)

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

13

Fig.  1.8  Number and percentage of labeled granule cells in the hippocampal dentate gyrus as a
function of postnatal age at the time of injection. Reproduction of Fig. 2 in Altman and Das (1965a)

60 days, 15% of the dentate granule cells are generated prenatally, while 85% are
generated postnatally (Fig.  1.11, top). The postnatal acquisition of dentate granule
cells is highest during the first week, declines somewhat by the second week, and
16% of the granule cells are generated after postnatal day 16. Counting all mature
granule cells in matched sections of the dorsal hippocampus in a large number of rats
established that the population increased tenfold from 3 to 70 days. Do the dentate
granule cells acquired during adulthood replace dying neurons or do they expand that
neuronal population? Shirley Bayer examined this question several years later in a
computerized volumetric study (Bayer et al. 1982; Bayer 1982). The results indicated
a linear increase in the total number of dentate granule cells in the right hippocampus
of rats aged 30, 120, 200 and 365 days of age (Fig.  1.12). The estimated increase
between 1 month and 1 year of age was in the range of 35–43%.

1.2.2 Hippocampal Granule Cell Hypoplasia Produced
by X-Irradiation
Our next step was to substantiate our autoradiographic results with other
experimental procedures. In a series of earlier studies dealing with the postnatal

14

J. Altman

Fig. 1.9  The prominent subgranular zone of the hippocampal dentate gyrus (arrows) in 6 day-old
(top) and 18 day-old (bottom) guinea pigs. Reproduction of Fig. 7B, C in Altman and Bayer (1975)

development of the cerebellar cortex, we found that exposure of the cerebellum to
a single dose of 150–200 R X-ray, decimated its subpial proliferative matrix, the
external germinal layer (EGL). Evidently, the EGL composed of the precursors of
cerebellar microneurons is extremely radiosensitive. However, we also found that
within a few days after irradiation, the EGL regenerated and produced a nearnormal complement of granule, basket, and stellate cells (Altman et  al. 1969a,b;
Altman and Anderson 1971, 1972). Because we wanted to study the behavioral role
of microneurons, we prevented this regeneration by exposing the cerebellum to
repeated daily doses of X-ray from birth until about days 10–15. This procedure
produced a hypoplastic cerebellum that contained the full complement of prenatally
generated deep neurons and Purkinje cells but was virtually devoid of granule,
basket, and stellate cells. In a series of behavioral studies we then showed that
by preventing the acquisition of cerebellar microneurons, the rats displayed
many of the symptoms previously described following ablation of the cerebellum
(e.g., Altman et al. 1971; Brunner and Altman 1973; Pellegrino and Altman 1979).
Performing the same procedure by exposing the hippocampus to successive daily
doses of low-level X-ray we obtained similar results (Fig. 1.13). Repeated counts
showed that with the right number of daily exposures of the hippocampus we
could consistently produce rats in which the dentate gyrus contained only the 15%

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

15

Fig. 1.10  The prominent subgranular zone of the hippocampal dentate gyrus in cats aged 30 day-old
(top) and 60 day-old (bottom) cats. Postnatal hippocampal neurogenesis may be more prominent in
carnivores than in rodents. Reproduction of Fig. 8C, D in Altman and Bayer (1975)

of the normal complement of granule cells (e.g., Bayer et  al. 1973; Bayer and
Altman 1974, 1975; Altman and Bayer 1975). That is, we obtained a perfect match
between the histological and autoradiographic estimates of the proportion of
granule cells generated postnatally and that obtained with X-irradiation.

Fig. 1.11  Top. Estimate of the percentage of dentate granule cells formed in 4 day-blocks, using
the “progressively delayed cumulative labeling technique” (see text). The results indicate that, as
judged at 2 months of age, 85% of the granule cells in the rat hippocampus are generated postnatally, 15% prenatally. Bottom. Estimate of the number of immature and mature dentate granule
cells in matched sections of the dorsal hippocampus. Each point, up to day 70, represents the mean
from six rats. There is close to a tenfold increase in the number of mature granule cells between
postnatal days 3 and 70. Reproduction of Figs. 9A and 13A in Bayer and Altman (1974)

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

17

Fig. 1.12  Top. Estimate of the total number of dentate granule cells in the right hippocampus of
rats aged 30, 120, 200 and 365 days. Each bar represents the mean from four rats. Reproduction
of Fig. 2A in Bayer et al. (1982). Bottom. Range in the number of granule cells in individual rats
as a function of age. Reproduction of Fig. 2B in Bayer (1982)

18

J. Altman

Fig. 1.13  The dentate gyrus in a normal rat (top) and a rat irradiated with eight doses of low-level
X-ray between postnatal days 2 and 15 (bottom). Note the selective reduction in the population of
granule cells in the irradiated rat. Reproduction of Fig. 2 in Bayer et al. (1973)

1.2.3 Behavioral Effects of Hippocampal Granule
Cell Hypoplasia
In an early exploratory study, we found differences in the number of 3H-thymidine
labeled cells in the dentate granular layer (we made no distinction between undifferentiated and differentiated cells) in rats that were “handled” daily from 2 to 11
days after birth and “unhandled” rats (Altman et al. 1968). These rats were flashlabeled with the radiochemical on day 11 and were killed 3  h, or 3 or 30 days
thereafter. At all ages, the concentration of labeled granular layer cells was somewhat higher in the handled rats than in the unhandled rats, suggesting influence by
that treatment on hippocampal cell proliferation (Fig. 1.14). Several years later we

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

19

Fig. 1.14  Results of an exploratory study of the number of labeled cells in the dentate gyrus of
the dorsal hippocampus in unhandled rats and rats that were handled daily from day 2 to day 11
and survived for 3 h, 3 days and 30 days thereafter. No distinction was made in this study between
small precursors cells and differentiated granule cells. Reproduced from Altman et al. (1968)

carried out a series of behavioral studies in adult rats, comparing irradiated rats with
hippocampal hypoplasia (which involved handling them daily in preparation for the
irradiation) with normal rats (Bayer et  al. 1973). Using a variety of tests, these
studies consistently showed that granule cell hypoplasia had the same effect on the
behavior of adult rats as was previously reported after extensive hippocampal
lesions. In the first of these studies we used two control groups: one that was
wrapped in the same way (“handled,” “stressed”) as the experimental group but was
not irradiated, and another that was left undisturbed (“unhandled”). Among the
behavioral changes we found the following. Rats with granule cell hypoplasia
traversed more squares and reared more often in open field tests than did the two
control groups (Fig. 1.15a,b). This suggested hyperactivity. To a much lesser extent,
the wrapped rats were also hyperactive. In the alternation test in a T-maze, normal
rats tend to randomly explore one or the other arm on their first trial but will explore
on their second trial, with a high degree of probability, the opposite arm. This
behavior is not seen after hippocampal lesions. Correspondingly, we found in rats
with granule cell hypoplasia (unlike the two control groups) they randomly chose
either arm of the maze on their second trial (Fig. 1.12c). This suggested short-term
memory deficit for what arm the animal has chosen on its first trial. The same
deficit was suggested by the failure of the irradiated rats in a passive avoidance
task, which involves the withholding of a natural response (feeding from a cup) that
leads to punishment (Fig. 1.12d), and their performance in a two-way active avoidance apparatus (shuttle box), in which the irradiated rats (unlike normal rats)
readily return to the compartment where they were previously shocked (Fig. 1.12e).
Similar abnormalities were obtained with other avoidance learning and extinction

20

J. Altman

Fig. 1.15  Behavioral effects of hippocampal granule cell hypoplasia in the irradiated rats (x in graphs
or bars) on several behavioral tests in comparison with two groups of controls (opaque versus
open circle or bar). See text for details. (a) Increase in the number of squares traversed in an open
field. (b) Increase in the number of rearing responses in the open field. (c) Random alternation in
a spontaneous alternation test in a T-maze. (d) Reduced latency in approaching a food cup
after being shocked. (e) Reduced avoidance response in a two-way avoidance task. Reproduction
of Fig. 3 in Bayer et al. (1973)

tasks (Brunner et al. 1974; Haggbloom et al. 1974). In another study, we examined
the effects of hippocampal granule cell hypoplasia on the initial learning and the
subsequent reversal of a series of tactile and visual discrimination tasks graded in
term of their difficulty (Gazzara and Altman 1981). The results indicated that the
irradiated rats were not handicapped on easy sensory discrimination tasks, irrespective of the modality used, but were handicapped in difficult tasks in which the
intensity or detectability of the stimuli was low. We suggested that the rats with
hippocampal hypoplasia might have been inattentive because of their hyperactivity.
These behavioral studies, in combination with the results obtained after cerebellar
irradiation alluded to above, led to our formulation of the concept of a type of
attentional deficit disorder due to microneuronal hypoplasia (Altman 1986, 1987).
While there have been some supportive follow up studies (e.g., Diaz-Granados
et al. 1994; Highfield et al. 1998), this hypothesis deserves further investigation.

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

21

1.2.4 Postnatal and Adult Neurogenesis in the Neocortex
and the Olfactory Bulb
In an early application of the autoradiographic technique, Smart and Leblond
discovered that cells of the subependymal layer of the mouse cerebrum are
labeled with 3H-thymidine (Smart 1961; Smart and Leblond 1961). Confirming
that in the rat (Altman 1963c), I also found that after prolonged survival there was
a rapid decline in the percentage of intensely labeled subependymal cells and an
increase in the percentage of lightly labeled cells (Fig.  1.16, top). This was in
sharp contrast to the locally multiplying glia in the white matter and gray matter
of the cortex where, after an initial spurt, the concentration of labeled cell
remained relatively constant (Fig.  1.16, bottom). Evidently, the cortical subependymal layer is a proliferative germinal matrix. What types of cells does this
proliferative matrix generate? At least a partial answer to this question came
when I discovered that an extension of the anterior cortical subependymal layer
is a source of a large stream of spindle shaped, darkly staining cells that migrate
to the olfactory bulb. I called this system, the rostral migratory stream (RMS,
Altman 1969a). Analysis of sequential autoradiograms in rats that were flashlabeled with 3H-thymidine on day 30 indicated that the RMS contains cells that
migrate into the olfactory bulb and settle there as the granule cells of the granular
and periglomerular layers (Fig. 1.17). Quantification of the labeling pattern in an
adult rat indicated the following pattern (Fig. 1.18). One hour after injection, the
percentage of labeled cells is highest in the subependymal layer near the fountain
of the RMS, is lower in the vertical limb of the RMS, and is negligible in the
horizontal limb and the olfactory bulb. Three days after the injection, the percentage of labeled cells becomes high in the vertical limb of the RMS but is still low
in the olfactory bulb. Six days after the injection, the percentage of labeled RMS
cells becomes low near the lateral ventricle, is higher in the vertical limb, and is
highest in the olfactory bulb. Twenty days after injection there were no longer any
labeled cells in the RMS but the olfactory bulb had a high concentration of
labeled cells (as seen in Fig. 1.17). I concluded that the RMS cells migrated into
the olfactory bulb and settled there some time between 3 and 20 days after administration of the radioactive thymidine. This study also established that, although
diminishing in size, the rostral migratory stream is still prominent in adult rats
(Fig.  1.19). A later investigation (Rosselli-Austin and Altman 1979) showed
that there is a steep increase in the ratio between the postnatally generated
granule cells and the prenatally generated mitral cells in the rat olfactory bulb
between the second week of life and 90 days of age (Fig.  1.20, top). Linda
Rosselli-Austin’s study indicated that 89% of the olfactory bulb granule cells are
acquired postnatally, and that the labeled granule cells survive up to 1 year of age
(Fig. 1.20, bottom).
In summary, our studies carried out in the 1960s and 1970s established definitively that a high proportion of the cerebellar, hippocampal, and olfactory bulb
microneurons are generated postnatally. We also showed that whereas the ­generation

22

J. Altman

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

23

of cerebellar microneurons is limited to the infantile period (postnatal day 21 in the
rat), the production of hippocampal and olfactory bulb microneurons continues,
albeit at a reduced rate, through adulthood.

Fig. 1.17  Tracings of the rostral migratory stream (RMS) in sagittal sections of the forebrain in
rats ranging in age from postnatal day 4 to 5 months. The olfactory bulb portion of the RMS is not
shown in the older animals. Reproduction of Fig. 2 in Altman (1969a)
Fig. 1.16  Top. Percentage of labeled cells in the subependymal layer of the lateral ventricle of
rats that flash-labeled with 3H-thymidine on postnatal day 13 and killed at different hourly and
daily intervals thereafter. Note the rapid decline in precursor cells with high levels of the
radiochemical (all opaque, mostly opaque) and increase of cells in which the radiochemical
became diluted (mostly light, very light) due to continuous cell divisions. Bottom. Percentage of
labeled glia (most of them heavily labeled) after survival ranging from 6 h to 60 days, and the total
number of glia in unit areas in matched sections of the cortical white matter. The initial increase
in the number and percentage of labeled glia cells was followed by relatively little change over
time. This indicates a much lower rate of cell proliferation at this site than in the subependymal
layer. Reproduction of Figs. 3 and 7 in Altman (1966c)

24

J. Altman

Fig. 1.18  Pattern of cell labeling in the olfactory bulb of rats that were flash-labeled with 3H-thymidine
on postnatal 30 and killed 1 h (top), 3 days (middle), and 20 days (bottom) after the injections. There
are few labeled cells in any of the layers of the olfactory bulb after 1-h survival, suggesting minimal
local multiplication. Labeled cells abound in the RMS after 3-day survival, and they have apparently
migrated into the olfactory bulb after 20-day survival. Abbreviations: GLO glomerular layer, IG
internal granular layer, MI mitral cell layer, SL RMS of the subependymal layer. Reproduction of
Figs. 14–16 in Altman (1969)

Fig. 1.19  Top. Sagittal view of the RMS (black) in a young–adult rat. Abbreviations: CC corpus
callosum, CO cerebral cortex, CP caudate-putamen, GLO glomerular layer, IGL internal granular
layer, LV lateral ventricle, MIT mitral cell layer, OB olfactory bulb. Bottom. Percentage of labeled
cells at different levels of the RMS, from caudal (near the lateral ventricle) to rostral (olfactory bulb)
in young–adult rats that survived for 1 h, 3 days and 6 days after flash labeling with 3H-thymidine.
One hour after injection the concentration of labeled cells was highest near the subependymal layer
and the vertical limb of the RMS but was negligible in the olfactory bulb. Six days after injection the
concentration of labeled cells decreased caudally and was highest rostrally in the horizontal limb of
the RMS and in the olfactory bulb. These findings demonstrated that the RMS contains a high
proportion of cells that migrate into the olfactory bulb. Reproduction of Fig. 5 in Altman (1969a)

26

J. Altman

Fig. 1.20  Top. Age changes in the ratio of the postnatally generated granule cells of the olfactory
bulb and the prenatally generated mitral cells from birth to 1-year of age. Bottom. Percentage of
labeled subependymal (RMS) cells and granule cells as a function of survival in rats that were
flash-labeled with 3H-thymidine at 30-days of age and survived up to 340 days thereafter.
Reproduction of Figs. 8 and 9 in Rosselli-Austin and Altman (1979)

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

27

1.2.5 The Relationship Between Prenatal and Postnatal
Neurogenesis
From the outset, our approach to adult neurogenesis has been a developmental
one. We conceptualized central nervous system (CNS) neurogenesis as a prolonged process, one that begins during early embryonic development and proceeds through late embryonic, early fetal, perinatal, infantile, juvenile, and adult
periods with distinctive age-related features and properties. It was with that in
mind that we have switched by the late 1970s from the confined analysis of
neurogenesis in selected brain regions to a comprehensive histological and autoradiographic analysis of the prenatal and postnatal development of the entire
CNS. We started this longitudinal project with rats as subjects (e.g., Bayer and
Altman 1991; Altman and Bayer 1997) and then, in the early 1990s, we turned
to humans. The latter resulted in a comprehensive account of the prenatal development of the human central nervous system (Bayer and Altman 1991; Altman
and Bayer 2002; Bayer and Altman 2002–2007). This investigation remains to
be extended to the postnatal period.
An example of how this longitudinal approach has shed some light on adult hippocampal neurogenesis is the study in which we tracked the development of the rat
hippocampus from the earliest stages of CNS development, i.e., when the future
forebrain consists only of a proliferative “stockbuilding” neuroepithelium (Altman
and Bayer 1990a,b,c). As we conceive of it, the neuroepithelium (NEP) is the primary germinal matrix of the CNS that is composed of a population of pluripotent
neural stem cells, as well as precursors of neurons and neuroglia with progressively
reduced fate potentials. Initially, the future hippocampal NEP can be delineated in
histological and thymidine-autoradiographic sections from the rest of the cortical
NEP only by its medial position. But after a few days, three morphologically different components become discernible in this medial portion of the cortical NEP: the
ammonic NEP, the dentate NEP, and the fimbrial GEP (glioepithelium) (Fig. 1.21).
Analysis of sequential autoradiograms indicates that the cell-dense and intenselylabeled ammonic NEP is the source of the early-generated large pyramidal cells
(hippocampal macroneurons) that will form Ammon’s horn. The pyramidal cells
sojourn for several days in the intermediate zone (a simpler field than the “stratified
transitional field” found in the neocortex; Altman and Bayer 2002) before settling
in the stratum pyramidale. The dentate NEP around a ventricular indentation, the
dentate notch, initially contains fewer cells and has a different labeling pattern than
the ammonic NEP. But soon a stream of proliferating and migrating spindle-shaped
cells leave the dentate NEP to form the dentate gyrus. By the time of birth, earlysettling granule cells form the thin external leaf of the dentate stratum granulosum
but the bulk of these precursors cells sojourn in the hylar subgranular zone. The
subgranular zone is most prominent and mitotically active during the juvenile period
but persists as a secondary neurogenic matrix into adulthood. Finally, the fimbrial
GEP is the primary germinal source of the oligodendrocytes of the progressively
expanding hippocampal fiber system, the alveus and the fornix.

28

J. Altman

Fig. 1.21  Schematic summary diagram of the primary and secondary germinal matrices of the
hippocampus. The primary germinal matrix consists of the subicular, Ammonic and dentate NEPs,
and the fimbrial GEP (glioepithelium). These persist until the perinatal period. The dentate NEP
is the source of migrating precursor cells that form the subgranular zone, a secondary germinal
matrix that is the source of the (mostly) postnatally differentiating granule cells, one that persists
as a neurogenic zone through adulthood. Modified after Fig.  16 in Altman and Bayer (1990b),
Fig. 13 in Altman and Bayer (1990c), and Fig. 11 in Altman and Bayer (1993)

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

29

1.3 Peer Reactions: Initial Excitement, Followed
by Marginalization and Subsequent Disqualification
1.3.1 A Short Period of Excitement
Charles Gross deserves credit to be among the first neuroscientists who recently
tried to reconstruct the history of the discovery of postnatal neurogenesis in the
mammalian brain (Gross 2000). As a colleague of mine at MIT in the 1960s, he had
personal knowledge of some of the events that transpired when I began to publish
papers on this subject. Regrettably, his interpretation of the nature of my original
demonstration is not quite accurate, and his reconstruction of peer reaction to it
differs substantially from what I can recollect and can at least partially document.
For instance, he states in reference to our work, “the available techniques were not
really adequate for an unambiguous demonstration that the adult-generated cells
were neurons rather than glia” (Gross 2000, p. 68). As I see it, no neuroanatomist
looking at our early illustrations, unless blinded by prejudice, should have failed to
see that the reduced silver grains in our autoradiograms were unambiguously over
dentate granule cells (see, Figs.  1.2 and 1.5). Neuroanatomists familiar with the
cytology of the hippocampus know that the stratum granulosum is a distinctive
neuronal layer that is densely packed with granule cells distinguished by pale
nuclei, a layer that is virtually devoid of smaller and more darkly staining neuroglia
cells. And what more direct and unambiguous way is there to demonstrate nuclear
DNA duplication and cell proliferation than using 3H-thymidine, a selective marker
that can be tracked over several generations as it is diluted with successive cell
divisions (Fig. 1.5)? In his review of the discovery of neurogenesis in adult birds,
Fernando Nottebohm graciously states a few years later that “Altman’s observations
and suggestions on postnatal neurogenesis were original and his wording was
cautious … Yet at the time, his claims met stiff resistance.” Nottebohm justifies this
peer reaction by saying, “It has been often said that the standard of proof is proportional to the importance and novelty of a claim” (Nottebohm 2002, pp. 737–738),
and he lists, again, among the several possible objections that the critics may have
entertained that the labeled cells were not neurons.
More recently, Gerd Kempermann (2006) reproduced my earliest illustration of
3
H-thymidine-labeled dentate granule cells (Altman 1963c), and refers to them as
“the first known depiction of adult neurogenesis” (Kempermann 2006, p. 37).
Kempermann continued, with reference to a subsequent paper I published with the
late Gopal Das (Altman and Das 1965a,b): “One strength of this study was that it
sought evidence of neuronal development and did not deliver a mere snapshot in
time.” Another strength was, Kempermann wrote, the demonstration with a second
method “that postnatal and adult hippocampal neurogenesis caused a sixfold increase
in the number of granule cells between 6 days after birth and the age of 3 months”
(Kempermann 2006, p. 38). What Kempermann might have added is that, in fact,
we used extensively an additional methodology to support postnatal hippocampal

30

J. Altman

neurogenesis, as well as a series of studies exploring its possible functional importance. As I mentioned earlier, we used focal irradiation of the hippocampus with
low-level x-ray to destroy the radiosensitive precursors of dentate neurons, a procedure that consistently produces a hippocampus with only about 15% of the normal
complement of granule cells, the same percentage that we were estimating to form
prenatally with quantitative histological and autoradiographic techniques. With
regard to the behavioral significance of the 85% of granule cells that are acquired
postnatally, our research showed that the prevention of this development produces
behavioral abnormalities that mimic partial or total destruction of the hippocampus.
My recollection of my standing in the scientific community during the 1960s
also differs from Gross’s account. Gross says, referring to me: “he was a self-taught
postdoctoral fellow working on his own in a Psychology Department …” (Gross
2000, p. 68), and, referring to the dogma of “no-new-neurons in the adult brain,”
speculates about “the difficulty that unknown and junior scientists have in challenging such traditions” (Gross 2000, p. 72). As a matter of fact, I did have the proper
academic credentials; I was known in the neuroscientific community; and most of
the scientists who tried to stop my work were younger and many of them were less
well established than I was. To begin with, on the strength of my preceding training
in neurophysiology and neuroanatomy (which I alluded to above), and possibly in
recognition of my accomplishments, I was appointed to the faculty of MIT in 1962,
with the rank of Associate Professor. The position involved the usual academic
obligations as well teaching several courses in behavioral neurobiology. To support
the latter task, I used a mimeographed textbook (entitled, The Biology of Behavior),
which was later published and became widely distributed nationally and internationally (Altman 1966b).
Charles Gross leaves the impression in his historic review that because I was an
unknown scientist my early publications could be ignored by the neurobiological
community. However, my recollection is that they were not ignored at all but
created considerable publicity. The discovery of postnatal neurogenesis was widely
reported in the press at the time and it created considerable interest, if not excitement, among many researchers for years thereafter. For instance, I still have a copy
of an article in the Washington Post about the possible importance of the discovery
of adult neurogenesis in mammals, written by Joshua Lederberg (pioneer molecular
biologist, later president of the Rockefeller University). Referring to one of my
papers (Altman 1967), Lederberg wrote: “In a nutshell, Dr. Altman has obtained
good evidence for the continued multiplication of neurons in young rats or kittens,
especially in a region of the brain called the hippocampus” (Lederberg 1968, p. A15).
[To be precise, I actually argued for the multiplication of the “precursors” of
neurons.] And in reference to another paper that appeared in Developmental
Psychobiology (Altman et  al. 1968), Lederberg wrote approvingly about the
possibility of “stretching out the period of the brain’s development” by “intentionally handling or playing with young rats for just 15 min daily during their first
11 days of life.” “The main point we have to ponder,” he wrote, “is the complicated
interplay between the environmental experience of the rat (or human infant?) and
the development of the actual structure of the brain” (Lederberg 1968, p. A15).

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

31

As I remember it, I got too much rather than too little attention from the
scientific community during the 1960s. There were endless invitations to give
lectures at different universities throughout the United States. Perhaps after repeating
the same lectures over and over again my performance became lackluster. After all,
what I wanted was not publicity but to get back to the laboratory and continue the
exciting but time-consuming research we were engaged in. Nor were we isolated
once back in the laboratory. I recall visits, some lengthy ones, from many scientists
from the USA as well as abroad. Among the visitors I recall John Eccles from
Australia, Otto Creutzfeldt from Germany, Jean Piaget from Switzerland, Jerzy
Konorski from Poland, Michel Jouvet from France, and several others. I also recall
William Windle (then the editor of Experimental Neurology) coming by, asking
questions and examining our histological slides, and encouraging me to send our
forthcoming papers on neuronal regeneration to his journal. I recall Maxwell
Cowan (who was to become the editor of the Journal of Comparative Neurology)
visiting the laboratory and assuring me that, unlike the retiring editor, he will see to
it that our papers will be promptly put through the review process. I also recall an
invitation from Dominic Purpura (then editor of Brain Research) to submit papers
to his journal. Moreover, I was invited by the outgoing editor of the Journal of
Comparative and Physiological Psychology to take over the editorship of the
journal (which I politely declined) and from the editors of Experimental Brain
Research to become the editor of the developmental neurobiology section of that
journal (which I accepted). I was grateful for this initial expression of support from
the scientific community, and with the generous financial support that we were
receiving from three government agencies we were able to pursue our research
goals and disseminate the data we gathered.
But then things started to change in the late 1960s, although it took me several
more years to realize that something was amiss. The first wake-up call came
when I was supposed to be granted tenure at MIT and my promotion was denied.
According to the letter I received, some outside referees did not consider my
promotion justified. That was no problem. By that time I intended to leave the Boston
area for personal reasons and had received expressions of interest as well as
several firm and attractive offers from a number of universities to join their faculty.
I accepted the offer from the Department of Biological Sciences of Purdue
University and joined it as a tenured professor in 1968. I selected that Department
not only because of the generous support I was offered but also because I thought
that moving to a rural milieu will give me and members of my laboratory the peace
and quiet that we needed to pursue our research. Indeed, we succeeded in establishing a productive laboratory, one that remained in operation at Purdue University
(West Lafayette) and later at Indiana/Purdue University (Indianapolis) for over
three decades. We continued to receive generous public funding for many years and
had little difficulty in publishing the papers that we were submitting to various
peer-reviewed journals. Indeed, the papers must have found an audience. According
to a note in Current Contents in 1981, analysis of the Science Citation Index database for 1965–1978 indicated that I was among the 1,000 most cited authors in
all the sciences (Garfield 1981). The list contained only 24 individuals in the

32

J. Altman

n­ eurosciences under the categories: “neurology,” “neurobiology,” and
“­neuropharmacology.” I would not argue that the number of citations could in any
sense be construed to reflect scientific merit or significance. I merely want to point
out that our work was widely read and quoted by our peers during that period.

1.3.2 Marginalization
I now know that there was a concerted attempt by some influential members of the
neuroscientific community to marginalize us, but at the time I did not pay much
attention to it. Reaching for some textbooks on my bookshelf published during the
1970s on developmental neurobiology, I find the flat statement by Marcus Jacobson:
“there is no convincing evidence of neuron production in the brain of adult
mammals …” (Jacobson 1970, p. 33). Jacobson modifies this dogmatic statement
somewhat in the second edition of his book: “There is no evidence showing that
neurons are formed in the subventricular zone in adult mammals, although granule
cells continue to be formed in various other germinal zones for a relatively short
period after birth” (Jacobson 1978, pp. 72–73). While he refers to several of our
papers on adult neurogenesis, he misquotes them to the effect that “granule cells of
the fascia dentate originate from day 10 of gestation to postnatal day 20 …”
(Jacobson 1978, p. 73). That position was advocated by Angevine (1965) not by us.
Another introductory text on brain development (Lund 1978), makes no reference
at all to adult neurogenesis and quotes none of our papers on that subject.
This neglect of our work continued during the 1980s. As I continue checking my
bookshelf, I find no reference to adult neurogenesis in the textbook on developmental neurobiology by Purves and Lichtman (1985) or in the chapter dealing with
the development of the CNS in Eric Kandel’s first edition of the Principles of
Neural Science (Schacher 1981). In the third edition of that textbook, published in
1991, Jessell states: “Neurogenesis ceases early in the development of the
mammalian brain, but persists into adulthood in some vertebrates, such as fish and
birds. For example, Fernando Nottebohm and his colleagues found that the number
of neurons in certain nuclei in the brains of adult songbirds changes cyclically on a
seasonal basis.” Denying postnatal mammalian neurogenesis, Jesssell qualifies the
preceding statement by saying that “…neurons can be generated from undifferentiated progenitor cells in the brain of some adult nonmammalian vertebrates. The
underlying mechanisms of such differentiation are not understood well enough to
determine whether cells in the adult mammalian central nervous system have a
similar potential” (Jessell 1991, p. 268). Reference to our published evidence of
postnatal neurogenesis was omitted not only by these widely circulated introductory
textbooks (of course, I find textbooks that did refer to our work) but also in some
more advanced publications. For instance, a book of reprints in developmental
neurobiology, with 47 journal articles from the 1960s and 1970s, contains none of
our papers (Patterson and Purves 1982). The book contains three reprints authored
or co-authored by Pasko Rakic but there is no reference in any of them to our work

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

33

(although he was fully familiar with our demonstrations). There was obviously a
movement afoot to marginalize us.

1.3.3 Disqualification
Open criticism of a scientific claim that runs counter to an established dogma is
fully justified; indeed, such a claim must be subjected to a thorough scrutiny before
the established paradigm is prematurely abandoned. However, I am not aware of
any public criticism or rebuttal of the data we have presented. Moreover, the
dismissal of our claim for postnatal neurogenesis has increased, rather than
decreased, as we gathered more and more evidence in its favor, and linked the
phenomenon of postnatal neurogenesis to its prenatal antecedents. Instead of open
criticism, there appears to have been a clandestine effort by a group of influential
neuroscientists to suppress the evidence we have presented and, later on, to silence
us altogether by closing down our laboratory. I make this accusation for the following
reasons: (a) by the early 1980s we were starting to have difficulties in getting our
grant applications approved; (b) by the mid-1980s we lost all our grant support; and
(c) by the early 1990s we had several of our submitted papers outright rejected.
[The latter included a series of three papers in which we reported the discovery of
the “stratified transitional field” in the developing rat cerebral cortex. The papers
were cited as “Altman J, Bayer SA, submitted, 1991a,b,c” in Bayer and Altman
(1991).] In fact, we have never since been able to get our grant applications
approved, not even when the topic of our research shifted from adult neurogenesis
to the comprehensive embryological study of CNS development in rats (Bayer and
Altman 1991; Altman and Bayer 1995, 1997) and, later, in humans (Altman and
Bayer 2001, 2002; Bayer and Altman 2002–2007).
What might have possessed a group of influential scientists to seek to destroy a
dedicated and productive laboratory? I do not have a factual answer to these questions because I have never been informed of the reasons why we were disqualified.
What I know unfortunately that the laboratory lost all its public support by the
mid-1980s, at about the time when Pasko Rakic published his widely quoted paper
in which he denied neurogenesis in the brains of adult primates (Rakic 1985). We
were not the only targets of Rakic’s public disapproval of adult neurogenesis.
I recall a meeting organized in 1984 in New York City by Fernando Nottebohm,
called Hope for a New Neurology, with a focus on adult neurogenesis. (I was not
invited to speak at that meeting but my wife, Shirley Bayer, was and I have accompanied her). At that occasion Rakic berated Michael Kaplan who reported his work
on postnatal neurogenesis in rats. Kaplan, an enthusiastic young scientist at the
time, later described that experience as the “death of a dogma and a research
career” (Kaplan 2001). In the late 1970s Kaplan presented his combined electron
microscopic and autoradiographic evidence that the radioactively labeled, newly
formed hippocampal and olfactory bulb granule cells of adult rats had axons,
dendrites and synapses and, hence, met  all the ultrastructural criteria of neurons

34

J. Altman

(Kaplan and Hinds 1977). Instead of being congratulated for presenting this new
evidence, Kaplan was severely castigated. Having rejected the evidence for postnatal
neurogenesis in rodents in the 1970s, Rakic later admitted the possibility of that
phenomenon in lower mammals but, as noted, denied that in primates. He stated
categorically: “Systematic analysis of autoradiograms prepared from postpubertal
rhesus monkeys given single and multiple injections of tritium-labeled thymidine
and killed 3 days to 6 years later displayed a slow turnover of glial cells but failed
to reveal any radiolabeled neurons. Therefore, unlike neurons of some nonprimate
species, all neurons of the rhesus monkey brain are generated during prenatal and
early postnatal life” (Rakic 1985, p. 1054). But Rakic was wrong again. Several
reports were published by the late 1990s of postnatal neurogenesis in the monkey
hippocampus (e.g., Gould et al. 1999) and also in humans (Eriksson et al. 1998).
As the evidence mounted, Rakic joined these authors (now using BrdU rather than
3
H-thymidine) and reported that there is “continuous generation of neurons, oligodendrocytes, and astrocytes in the hippocampal dentate gyrus of adult macaque
monkeys” (Kornack and Rakic 1999, p. 5768). Why did Rakic fail earlier to obtain
autoradiographic evidence for postnatal neurogenesis in primates? He owed the
scientific community an explanation but offered none. Instead, he gave the historical
record a new twist by stating that “Unlike cells in most tissues … most neurons of
the mammalian brain are entirely generated during early development … One
exception, which was first suspected in rodents 30 years ago [quoting Altman and
Das 1965b] and later substantiated [quoting Kaplan and Hinds 1977] is the granule
neurons of the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus” (Kornack and Rakic, 1999,
p. 5768). Note the disingenuous term “suspected” to characterize our multipronged
demonstrations. Kaplan is now “in” (after all, he is no longer a competitor) but
Altman is still “out.”
How could a coterie of scientists succeed in making a productive laboratory
terminally lose its public funding? Were we blacklisted? I consider that unlikely.
We have never been accused of doing anything wrong and have remained productive to this day. The criteria for granting government research awards, as I heard it
over and over again when I served on grant-awarding panels, are “scientific merit”
and “past performance.” And what might have justified professional administrators,
serving as trustees of public funds, to try to close down a productive laboratory
without an open public inquiry? I suspect that both sociological and psychological
factors contributed to our disqualification. The sociological factors are easy to
reconstruct; the psychological factors are more difficult and speculative.
To begin with the sociology. Neurobiology was still a Small Science when I
entered the field in the early 1960s. There were relatively few neuroscientists
around, the expense of doing neurobiological research was far more modest than
it is today, and any capable and hard working researcher could accomplish a
lot with the assistance of a few collaborators and technicians. However, within a
few decades neurobiology turned into a Big Science, with many more applicants seeking public funding than the granting agencies could possibly support.
Universities admitted ever more graduate students to be trained in the neurosciences, research laboratories increased in number and size, and consequently there

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

35

arose a fierce competition for research and training grants by the 1980s. As this
transformation took place, many neuroscientists who started out as bona fide
researchers turned into administrators and public relation managers. Instead of
sitting at the workbench, the job of the “principal investigator” became to coordinate what went on in his or her laboratory, edit papers written by associates who
did the research that he or she no longer had the time (and sometimes the training)
to perform, and spend endless hours politicking and paper work to keep the laboratory financially solvent. The leader of a research group had to engage in public
relations work at home to drum up interest in the work the laboratory was pursuing;
write progress reports and write and rewrite grant applications; spend days traveling
from one place to another to attend meetings and conferences to find outside
supporters and confederates; and, above all, establish good relationship with the
administrators of public funds to obtain preferential treatment. While initially it did
not much matter whom you knew but what you knew, increasingly it became more
and important whom you knew, and how many of them you knew, to get funded.
Perhaps the idea of training so many neuroscientists, all of whom could not
possibly be supported by available funds, was that those with the greatest ability and
perseverance will prevail and those less well qualified will leave the field and pursue
some other career. Unfortunately, instead of the scientifically best qualified, faculty
positions were increasingly occupied by those with an administrative bent and great
political skills; people who could attracted large sums of money and support their
institution. As a consequence of this selection process, the panels of granting agencies
and the editorial boards of journals – which became flooded with grant applications
and manuscripts – increasingly became filled with a new breed of scientists, individuals skilled in forming alliances to support one another’s projects and getting
ahead of their competitors. I have personally witnessed that just a few derogatory
remarks made by one or two members of a panel judging a grant application meant
that the unfortunate applicant received a “priority” rating that was officially
“approved” but was not funded. The same may happen when a biased editor sends a
submitted manuscript to a reviewer known to be hostile to the author or his group.
Let me now turn to two possible psychological factors contributing to our
disqualification. First, we bucked the trend by practicing Small Science in an
environment that increasingly favored Big Science. By spending endless hours in
the laboratory and doing very little public relations work inevitably led to our isolation. Having failed to spend the necessary time and effort in the market place, we
failed to recruit a cadre of confederates and supporters. Students and postdoctoral
fellows quickly learned while they listened to popular speakers making their
rounds, and dominating endless symposia and conferences, as to who was “in” and
who was “out”; whom to quote or not quote in your bibliography to make it more
likely that it will be reviewed by a peer sympathetic to your approach or findings;
and what line of research to pursue in light of what is favored or not favored by the
granting agencies at any given time. Again, in my personal experience, I watched
how most of my former students and even associates, realizing that we were out of
favor, stopped working on problems related to postnatal neurogenesis (which they
received their training for) and found other projects to commit themselves to or

36

J. Altman

abandoned their research career altogether. But there may have been another
psychological factor that has actually contributed to our becoming outcasts. Big
Science needs administrators. In addition to those who turn to administration with
the selfish motive of exercising power and influence, there are undoubtedly those
who sacrifice their research career for the public good. But that sacrifice may have
unfortunate consequences. What scientist would not rather make a great discovery
himself or herself than be the cheerleader of the group that makes such a discovery?
The researcher turned administrator may console himself or herself that in an age
of Big Science that is no longer possible. But what if that is contradicted by an
individual or a small group of researchers who come up with a new discovery?
They become the envy of the advocates of Big Science. They are liable to be
distrusted and their claim discounted as unlikely to be true.

1.4 Prospering Under Adverse Conditions and Switching
to the Comprehensive Study of CNS Development
How did our laboratory survive, indeed prosper, without research grants and how
could we remain productive while facing peer indifference and outright hostility?
And why did we turn by the early 1980s from focusing on postnatal and adult
neurogenesis to the study of the embryonic development of the CNS? To answer
the first question I have to divulge some personal matters that I have never before
aired in public. To the second question I have a more objective answer.
Our laboratory survived and prospered, notwithstanding peer hostility and the
withdrawal of all public funding, because several circumstances worked in our
favor. The most important of these was that by the time we could no longer had
public funds we have amassed a large collection of fully-processed embryos and
brains. Financing the work ourselves, we were in a position to analyze the available
materials and, instead of submitting papers to mainstream journals (a costly and
painful enterprise) we started to summarize our results in books that also yielded
some royalty. But there was also a psychological factor; namely, that I was well
prepared by my earlier life experiences not to be discouraged by public indifference
and hostility. When I committed myself to the study of brain–behavior relationships
as a teenager (and wrote my first programmatic essay on the subject) I was barred
from finishing my formal education in quasi-fascist Hungary because I belonged to
a disenfranchised religious/ethnic minority. When the Wehrmacht occupied
Hungary, I was incarcerated in a forced-labor camp and worked on a railroad gang.
After some time there, I escaped and lived clandestinely in Budapest, which very
soon came under siege. My survival was aided, I tend to believe, by a syndrome that
I developed, what I call “aparanoia.” Blissfully neglecting the fact that they were
after my kind, I did not hide but walked with head erect through the streets, past
bayoneted soldiers and gendarmes looking for Jews and deserters. I convinced
myself that I was going to survive no matter what the Nazis’ intentions were. When
the Red Army liberated us in 1945, I resumed my formal education. However,

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

37

I could not tolerate the rising Communist dictatorship and fled the country in 1946.
I became a stateless, displaced person in West Germany, waiting there for many
years before I could secure the requisite documents to migrate to Australia. While
that sounds like a misfortune, those were very good years. I was able to attend
lectures and seminars at a prominent German university and spent endless hours in
its library. I continued informally with my education in Australia, where I worked
through the first half of the 1950s as a college librarian. In my spare hours there,
I wrote the bulk of the manuscript that was later published as a textbook in behavioral neurobiology (Altman 1966a,b,c).
When I migrated to the United States in 1955, I embarked on a research career in
neurobiology by getting formal predoctoral and postdoctoral training at different
facilities in New York City (described above). In 1959 I organized a small laboratory
at the New York University Medical School and worked there with Elizabeth
Altman and some student assistants. In the early 1960s we moved to the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (also described above) and after working there for
many years, the greatly expanded laboratory and staff was transferred to Purdue
University in 1968. At Purdue I had the great fortune that Shirley Bayer joined the
laboratory as a graduate student in 1970. Although we came from a very different
background, we soon established a close personal and professional partnership. For
many years we both received generous public grants, and the laboratory became very
productive. Then abruptly we lost all our funding and had to face all the consequences that lack of financial support produces in the academic world. How did we
react to that misfortune? We thought of fighting our disqualification and did some
protesting. But, not being able to accomplish anything, we decided that it made
better sense to finance our research ourselves rather than waste our time and energy
in writing and rewriting grant applications and battling our adversaries. This is probably not the course of action that many scientists might have taken in a similar
situation but I was adequately prepared to work in isolation.
To turn to second question: Why did Shirley Bayer and I turn by the mid-1980s
from the study of postnatal and adult neurogenesis to the embryonic development
of the CNS in rats and humans? Perhaps peer indifference contributed to our
reduced enthusiasm for that work. But a more important consideration was our
conviction that adult neurogenesis must be studied as a facet of CNS development.
We maintained all along that adult neurogenesis is the end phase in the continuum
of CNS development. Accordingly, we embarked in the mid-1970s on a long-term
project to re-examine the whole course of CNS development by combining traditional histological techniques with 3H-thymidine autoradiography. By the end of the
1980s we had prepared close to 2,000 histologically and autoradiographically
processed prenatal and postnatal rat embryos and dissected brains. This enabled us
to carry out a detailed investigation of the prenatal and postnatal development of the
rodent cerebellum, spinal cord, brainstem, diencephalon, hippocampus and basal
ganglia, as well as some components of the cerebral allocortex and neocortex
(references to these studies are listed in Altman and Bayer 1982; Bayer and Altman
1991, 2004; Altman and Bayer 1995, 1997). We then turned in the mid-1990s to the
study of human CNS development. To accomplish that, we worked for months at

38

J. Altman

the National Museum of Health and Medicine in Washington, DC, which houses the
Carnegie, Minot, and Yakovlev Collections of prenatal and postnatal human brains.
(We did seek grant support for this effort but got none; except that the high daily
fee to use the facility was graciously waived.) We took over 10,000 low- and
higher-power photomicrographs there in preparation for a 5-volume Atlas of
Human Central Nervous System Development. That task was completed recently
(Bayer and Altman 2002–2007).
Our developmental approach, we believe, has shed some light on the nature
and significance of postnatal and adult neurogenesis (Altman and Bayer 2007).
It brought support for our concept of two neurogenic production sites in the developing CNS: the primary neuroepithelium (NEP) and the secondary germinal matrices
(SGM). The NEP is composed of stem cells and progenitor cells of the macroneurons
that form the core structures and gross circuitry of the CNS. It originates early
during embryonic development as the open neural plate. After the neural plate folds
and fuses dorsally, the lumen of the cephalic vesicles become filled with cerebrospinal fluid to form the narrow protoventricles. The protoventricles then expand to
form the superventricles of the telencephalon, diencephalon, mesencephalon, and
rhombencephalon. Because the stem cells and progenitor cells of the NEP have to
shuttle to the ventricular lumen to undergo mitosis, the size and configuration
(eminences, protuberances, invaginations) of the variegated shorelines of the superventricles are major determinants of the number of neurons generated for different
brain structures at different NEP compartments (mosaics). We provided some
evidence that the NEP is initially composed of stockbuilding precursor cells that
expand and form the region-specific compartments, and postulated that their proliferation and progressive fate-restriction are dependent on two important regulatory
mechanisms: hypothetical trophic factors contained in the cerebrospinal fluid
system, and reciprocal signaling between the NEP and the concurrently developing
peripheral sense organs and motor systems. In the next stage of CNS development,
the stockbuilding NEP cells start to generate exiting daughter cells of two types,
postmitotic cells that differentiate as neurons and neuroglia, and distinctive precursor cells that retain their proliferative capacities. The postmitotic young projection and relay neurons migrate radially, tangentially and, at some sites, follow
tortuous routes and sojourn in intermediate zones before they settle down. These
early-generated neurons form the brain parenchyma by filling the expansion spaces
of a unique, hitherto unrecognized tissue, the initially expanding then shrinking
superarachnoid reticulum. In mammals, the periventricular NEP is principally
active during the prenatal period.
The NEP, as noted, is also the source of progenitor cells that form the SGMs.
Unlike the NEP, the SGMs persist for varying periods postnatally and generate the
locally-arborizing, short-axoned microneurons that become important constituents
of the fine circuitry of certain brain structures. Among the SGMs of the developing
mammalian brain are the following. (a) The bulk of the subependymal layers of
the forebrain that generate the microneurons of the cerebral cortex and the
neostriatum during the late embryonic and perinatal periods. (b) The subpial external
germinal layer of the cerebellum that generates the microneurons of the cerebellar

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

39

cortex during the infantile and juvenile periods. (c) The interstitial subgranular
zone of the hippocampus that generates the microneurons of the hippocampal
dentate gyrus throughout life. (d) The circumscribed subependymal layer of the
anterior cerebrum that, likewise, generates the microneurons of the olfactory bulb
throughout the entire life span of all mammals. While the macroneurons that are
generated in mammals during gestation are minimally affected by extrauterine
events, the postnatally generated microneurons of the cerebellum, olfactory bulb,
and hippocampus are subject to considerable environmental influences. That led
to our earlier suggestion that they may play a major role in responding to environmental factors, perhaps by mediating certain types of learning processes
(Altman 1967, 1970).

1.5 The Changed Paradigm in the Study of Adult
Neurogenesis
Scientific theories – unlike political attitudes, religious faiths or aesthetic judgments – are
not matters of personal or group preferences. A person’s or a group’s political views
are understandably guided by economic and social interests, and idiosyncratic or
conventional preferences. Religious beliefs are based on social tradition and indoctrination, and a faith in a supernatural world inaccessible to the senses. Aesthetic
choices may be a matter of personal taste or of changing fads, fashions or artistic
trends. But scientific theories cannot be sustained by appeal to such subjective
values. Scientific theories must comply with the objective facts ascertained by
empirical observations and research findings; they stand or fall as new data
gathered confirm them or refute them. Of course, science is pursued by human
beings with different interests, backgrounds and tastes, and therefore personal and
social factors necessarily play a role what a scientist studies and what theories he
or she will favor. But sooner or later the facts will prevail and no matter how powerful
or prestigious the supporters of a refuted theory, the theory will eventually be
abandoned. In the past, with few scientists around, false scientific theories, such as
the Ptolemaic system of the structure of the universe, could be upheld for some time
after it has been shown to be inadequate. Nicolas Copernicus’ De revolutionibus
orbium coelestium was published in 1543, providing good astronomical evidence
that the earth rotates around the sun, but his theory was not widely accepted until
1687, when Isaac Newton, using Johann Kepler’s additional observations and
calculations, developed his theory of gravitation in his Philosophiae naturalis
principia mathematica. In the meantime the ecclesiastical authorities censured and
put under house arrest Galileo Galilei, and burned Giordano Bruno at stake,
because they dared to argue in favor of the heliocentric theory. As science has
become such a large enterprise with so many practitioners, untenable theories
fall by the wayside much faster nowadays than they did in the past. The theory of
adult neurogenesis, of course, does not have either the same global significance as
the theory of gravitation nor does it challenge the biblical account of the Earth’s

40

J. Altman

place in the solar system. But the theory of adult neurogenesis does have important
theoretical and practical implications. It supports an emerging new view of the
CNS, one with greater dynamic properties and regenerative potentials than was
hitherto contemplated. Because of the rapid increase in the pace of scientific progress,
it took only about 20–30 years that the old dogma of “no postnatal neurogenesis”
was abandoned by all but a few diehard scientists.
The study of adult vertebrate neurogenesis became a respectable research
endeavor in the 1980s when Fernando Nottebohm and his collaborators reported
their findings about the seasonal turnover of neurons in the forebrain of songbirds
(Goldman and Nottebohm 1983; Alvarez-Buylla and Nottebohm 1988; see Chap. 2
for details). And the study of mammalian neurogenesis became a truly popular
subject soon thereafter when two new techniques were introduced. One was the
increased use of bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU), instead of 3H-thymidine, to label the
proliferative precursors of neurons. The other was the introduction of various
molecular markers for the identification of the proliferating, differentiating and
maturing neurons. These two techniques were very important innovations. The
BrdU procedure is much simpler and faster than 3H-thymidine autoradiography.
Indeed, I suspect that one of the reasons why more investigators have not studied
adult neurogenesis in the 1970s and 1980s was that they were discouraged by the
difficulty of effectively using the liquid emulsion technique for high-resolution
3
H-thymidine autoradiography. We spent several years to develop a reliable and
consistent methodology. This included the use of 3H-thymidine of the right specific
activity; injection of the optimal dose of the radiochemical in relation to the
animal’s body weight; proper and consistent dilution of the nuclear emulsion; slow
drying of the emulsion in the dark before packaging and refrigeration to avoid
mechanical artifacts; very long exposure period (we consistently used 3 months) to
get optimal results; and, last but not least, use of counterstaining techniques that do
not remove part or all of the emulsion. Significantly, I am not aware of reports of
false positive results with 3H-thymidine but only of false negatives (e.g., Rakic
1985). And I must also note that with all its advantages, the BrdU technique has its
pitfalls. Most importantly, BrdU is a toxic substance that produces morphological
and behavioral abnormalities, triggers cell death, and leads to the formation of
teratomas (Kolb et al. 1999; Sekerkova et al. 2004; Taupin 2006). In contrast, with
survival almost as long as 1 year after the administration of our standardized dose
of 3H-thymidine, we have observed no deleterious somatic effect in our experimental animals and little or no reduction in the number or proportion radioactively
tagged granule cells (see, for instance, Fig. 1.20). Hence the comparative validity
and reliability of these two techniques warrants further investigation.
The molecular markers that have been added to the armamentarium of the traditional techniques for the identification of neurons and neuroglia have also been very
useful in the study of adult neurogenesis. Validated molecular markers allow investigators to distinguish small neurons from different types of neuroglia, and identify
stages in the differentiation of young neurons. However, there are again pitfalls
because molecular markers are only indirect indicators whether or not a cell is a
true neuron. Direct evidence requires the application of traditional anatomical,

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

41

physiological and behavioral techniques. By definition, a cell is not a bona fide
neuron unless it has dendrites and an axon; is capable of producing generator potentials and action potentials; has synapses that allow information transmission from
sense organs to neurons, from one neuron to the next, and from motor neurons to
muscles or other effectors; and serves as a link in the coordination of behavior.
Since differentiating, migrating and maturing young neurons may lack some of
these features and properties, the cell identified with a neuronal marker may be a
potential neuron, a neuron in the process of differentiation, or a cell that has some
neuronal features but may never become a true functional neuron. Let me illustrate
the pitfalls of reliance on markers in the categorization of developing CNS cells
with reference to one of the earliest and most commonly used molecular marker
in neuroscience, i.e., glial fibrillary acidic protein (Bignami and Dahl 1974).
This protein (GFAP) is widely claimed to be a definitive marker for astrocytes.
However, it has been known for some time that GFAP is present in germinal matrices
where precursor cells generate both neurons and neuroglia (Levitt et al. 1981), and
the possibility has been raised that a marker that specifically reacts in the mature
brain with glial filaments may also react with transient filamentous elements in progenitor cells destined to become neurons (Bennett 1987). For example, the precursors
of granule cells in the hippocampal subgranular zone are GFAP-positive (Seri et al.
2001; Namba et  al. 2005). The assumption that GFAP is a definitive marker of
astrocytes led some investigators to conclude that the hippocampal granule cells are
progeny of astrocytes (e.g., Seri et al. 2001). However, a more reasonable conclusion would be that CNS progenitor cells, irrespective whether they will produce
neurons or neuroglia, share the property of expressing GFAP (e.g., Steiner et  al.
2004). That would invalidate the currently popular theory that “radial glia” are
progenitors of neurons (e.g., Anthony et  al. 2004; Englund et  al. 2005). The
currently available evidence supports the view that both neurons and neuroglia
derive from NEP and SGM precursor cells that share many molecular properties.
It will require the work of a professional science historian to reconstruct how
attitudes have changed over the period when the study of postnatal and adult
neurogenesis was not considered a topic deserving public support and the time
when it became a popular subject matter studied by hundreds of investigators.
Typing the term “hippocampal neurogenesis” into the search engine of Google
Scholar (the date is 01-15-08) the query retrieves 5,150 references; “subgranular
zone” retrieves 2,750 references; and “rostral migratory stream” retrieves 2,330
references. Having identified these phenomena (and coined the terms) in the decade
between 1965 and 1975, we feel gratified that by 2008 they have captured the attention of so many investigators. (Never mind, that so many of the articles consulted
do not credit us for these discoveries but attribute them to others. Why get involved
in old controversy and risk unfavorable treatment by a reviewer in the opposing
camp? Quoting an article recently published in mainstream journals is a safer bet.
After all that passed the Imprimatur of a semi-official Establishment journal.) We
also feel gratified that, judging by the increasing number of references to them,
some of our later empirical and conceptual contributions are also becoming
accepted. For instance, we have advocated for decades the replacement of the

42

J. Altman

narrowly conceived term “ventricular zone” with the broader term “neuroepithelium.”
We did that to stress the fact that the NEP is not just a component of the maturing
brain but the source of all its neural elements, one that forms and expands greatly
before the brain has any differentiated neurons. Likewise, we have advocated the
replacement of the term “external granular layer” of the cerebellum with “external
germinal layer” to stress two facts. First, that this subpial tissue is not composed of
“granule” cells, which is a universally accepted term for such differentiated neurons
as the granule cells of the cerebellum, hippocampus and olfactory bulb. Second, the
term “germinal” reminds us that this transient proliferative matrix is an important
component of a late-generated neurogenic system of the developing cerebellum.
Much of the foregoing is about the past. As we are entering a new period in
neuroscience, what Nottebohm called the New Neurology, it is more rewarding to
look forward and contemplate what the future may bring. The substantive chapters
that follow this personal memoir, will acquaint the reader with some of the recent
advances in the study of adult neurogenesis. Adult neurogenesis has been identified
by now in all vertebrates, fishes, reptiles, birds, and mammals. Important investigations are being carried out in various laboratories about the physiological properties
of the postnatally acquired hippocampal and olfactory bulb granule cells, their
migration and integration into the circuitry of these structures, and their role in how
animals adapt to their environment and learn. Also of great promise are the exploratory studies concerned with the possible role of adult neurogenesis in stress
disorders and depression, and such brain abnormalities and pathologies as schizophrenia, Parkinsonism, stroke and ischemia. There is no way to predict what these
ongoing studies will bring to light but the full examination of the dynamic properties and remedial potentials of the adult brain is certainly a well-justified
scientific enterprise.
Acknowledgment  I thank Dr. Tatsunori Seki for the invitation to present this personal memoir,
and dedicate this contribution to Dr. Shirley Bayer who shares credit for all that we have accomplished together in the last 3–4 decades.

References
Altman J (1962a) Autoradiographic study of degenerative and regenerative proliferation of neuroglia cells with tritiated thymidine. Exp Neurol 5:302–318
Altman J (1962b) Are new neurons formed in the brains of adult mammals? Science
135:1127–1128
Altman J (1963a) Regional utilization of leucine-H3 by normal rat brain: Microdensitometric
evaluation of autoradiograms. J Histochem Cytochem 11:741–750
Altman J (1963b) Differences in the utilization of tritiated leucine by single neurones in normal
and exercised rats: An autoradiographic investigation with microdensitometry. Nature
199:777–780
Altman J (1963c) Autoradiographic investigation of cell proliferation in the brains of rats and cats.
Anat Rec 145:573–591
Altman J (1966a) Autoradiographic and histological studies of postnatal neurogenesis. II. A
longitudinal investigation of the kinetics, migration and transformation of cells incorporating

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

43

tritiated thymidine in infant rats, with special reference to postnatal neurogenesis in some brain
regions. J Comp Neurol 128:431–474
Altman J (1966b) Organic Foundations of Animal Behavior. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston
Altman J (1966c) Proliferation and migration of undifferentiated precursor cell in the rat during
postnatal gliogenesis. Exp Neurol 16:263–278
Altman J (1967) Postnatal growth and differentiation of the mammalian brain, with implications
for a morphological theory of memory. In, Quarton G, Melnechuk T, Schmitt FO (eds) The
Neurosciences: A Study Program, pp. 723–743. New York: Rockefeller Univ Press
Altman J (1969a) Autoradiographic and histological studies of postnatal neurogenesis. IV. Cell
proliferation in the anterior forebrain, with special reference to persisting neurogenesis in the
olfactory bulb. J Comp Neurol 137:433–458
Altman J (1969b) DNA metabolism and cell proliferation. In, Lajtha A (ed) Handbook of
Neurochemistry, vol. 2, pp. 137–182. New York: Plenum Press
Altman J (1970) Postnatal neurogenesis and the problem of neural plasticity. In, Himwich WA
(ed) Developmental Neurobiology, pp. 197–237. Springfield IL: Thomas
Altman J (1986) An animal model of minimal brain dysfunction. In, Lewis M (ed) Learning
Disabilities and Prenatal Risk, pp. 241–304. Urbana: Univ Illinois Press
Altman J (1987) Morphological and behavioral markers of environmentally induced retardation of
brain development: An animal model. Environ Health Perspect 74:153–168
Altman J, Altman, E (1962) Increased utilization of an amino acid and cellular proliferation
demonstrated autoradiographically in the optic pathways of pigeons. Exp Neurol 6:142–151
Altman J, Anderson WJ (1971) Irradiation of the cerebellum in infant rats with low-level X-ray:
Histological and cytological effects during infancy and adulthood. Exp Neurol 30:492–509
Altman J, Anderson WJ (1972) Experimental reorganization of the cerebellar cortex. I.
Morphological effects of elimination of all microneurons with prolonged X-irradiation started
at birth. J Comp Neurol 146:355–406
Altman J, Bayer SA (1975) Postnatal development of the hippocampal dentate gyrus under normal
and experimental conditions. In, Isaacson RL, Pribram KH (eds) The Hippocampus, vol. 1,
pp. 95–122. New York: Plenum Press
Altman J, Bayer SA (1982) Morphological development of the rat cerebellum and some of its
mechanisms. Exp Brain Res Suppl 6:8–46
Altman J, Bayer SA (1990a) Mosaic organization of the hippocampal neuroepithelium and the
multiple germinal sources of dentate granule cells. J Comp Neurol 301:325–342
Altman J, Bayer SA (1990b) Prolonged sojourn of developing pyramidal cells in the intermediate zone
of the hippocampus and their settling in the stratum pyramidale. J Comp Neurol 301:343–364
Altman J, Bayer SA (1990c) Migration and distribution of two populations of hippocampal
granule cell precursors during the perinatal and postnatal periods. J Comp Neurol 301:365–381
Altman J, Bayer SA (1993) Are new neurons formed in the brains of adult mammals? A progress
report, 1962–1992. In, Cuello AC (ed) Neuronal Cell Death and Repair, pp. 203–225.
Amsterdam: Elsevier (Restorative Neurology, vol. 6)
Altman J, Bayer SA (1995) Atlas of Prenatal Rat Brain Development. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Press
Altman J, Bayer SA (1997) Development of the Cerebellar System in Relation to its Evolution,
Structure and Functions. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press
Altman J, Bayer SA (2001) Development of the Human Spinal Cord: An Interpretation Based on
Experimental Studies in Animals. New York: Oxford Univ Press
Altman J, Bayer SA (2002) Regional differences in the stratified transitional field and the honeycomb matrix of the developing human cerebral cortex. J Neurocytol 31:613–632
Altman J, Bayer SA (2007) Concluding essay. In, Bayer SA, Altman J (eds) The Human Brain
During the Early First Trimester, pp. 426–489. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press (Atlas of Human
Central Nervous System Development, vol. 5)
Altman J, Das GD (1964a) Autoradiographic and histological investigation of changes in the
visual system of rats after unilateral enucleation. Anat Rec 148:535–545

44

J. Altman

Altman J, Das GD (1964b) Autoradiographic examination of the effects of enriched environment
on the rate of glial multiplication in the adult rat brain. Nature 204:1161–1163
Altman J, Das GD (1965a) Autoradiographic and histological evidence of postnatal hippocampal
neurogenesis in rats. J Comp Neurol 124:319–336
Altman J, Das GD (1965b) Postnatal origin of microneurones in the rat brain. Nature
207:953–956
Altman J, Das GD (1966) Autoradiographic and histological studies of postnatal neurogenesis.
J Comp Neurol 126:337–390
Altman J, Das GD (1967) Postnatal neurogenesis in the guinea pig. Nature 214:1098–1101
Altman J, Das GD, Anderson WJ (1968) Effects of infantile handling on morphological development of the rat brain: An exploratory study. Dev Psychobiol 1:10–20
Altman J, Anderson WJ, Wright KA (1969a) Early effects of X-irradiation of the cerebellum in
infant rats: Decimation and reconstitution of the external granular layer. Exp Neurol
24:196–216
Altman J, Anderson WJ, Wright KA (1969b) Reconstitution of the external granular layer of the
cerebellar cortex in infant rats after low-level X-irradiation. Anat Rec 163:453–472
Altman J, Anderson WJ, M Strop (1971) Retardation of cerebellar and motor development by
focal X-irradiation during infancy. Physiol Behav 7:143–150
Alvarez-Buylla A, Nottebohm F (1988) Migration of young neurons in adult avian brain. Nature
335:353–354
Angevine JB (1965) Time of neuron origin in the hippocampal region: An autoradiographic study
in the mouse. Exp Neurol Suppl 2:1–70
Anthony TE, Klein C, Fishell G, Heintz N (2004) Radial glia serve as neuronal progenitors in all
regions of the central nervous system. Neuron 41:881–890
Bayer SA (1982) Changes in the total number of dentate granule cells in juvenile and adult rats:
A correlated volumetric and 3H-thymidine autoradiographic study. Exp Brain Res
46:315–323
Bayer SA, Altman J (1974) Hippocampal development in the rat: Cytogenesis and morphogenesis
examined with autoradiography and low-level X-irradiation. J Comp Neurol 158:
55–80
Bayer SA, Altman J (1975) Radiation-induced interference with postnatal hippocampal cytogenesis in rats and its long-term effects on the acquisition of neurons and glia. J Comp Neurol
163:1–20
Bayer SA, Altman J (1991) Neocortical Development. New York: Raven Press
Bayer SA, Altman J (2002–2007) Atlas of Human Central Nervous System Development
(5 volumes). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press (Taylor & Francis Group)
Bayer SA, Altman J (2004) Development of the telencephalon: Neural stem cells, neurogenesis,
and neuronal migration. In, Paxinos G (ed) The Rat Nervous System (Third ed), pp. 27–73.
New York: Elsevier
Bayer SA, Brunner RL, Hine R, Altman J (1973) Behavioural effects of interference with the
postnatal acquisition of hippocampal granule cells. Nature New Biol 242:222–224
Bayer SA, Yackel JW, Puri PS (1982) Neurons in the rat dentate gyrus granular layer substantially
increase during juvenile and adult life. Science 216:890–892
Bennett G (1987) Changes in intermediate filament composition during neurogenesis. Curr Topics
Dev Biol 21:151–182
Bignami A, Dahl D (1974) Astrocyte-specific protein and neuroglial differentiation: An immunofluorescence study with antibodies to the glial fibrillary acidic protein. J Comp Neurol
153:27–38
Brunner RL, Altman J (1973) Locomotor deficits in adult rats with moderate to massive retardation of cerebellar development during infancy. Behav Biol 9:169–188
Brunner RL, Hagbloom SJ, Gazarra RA (1974) Effects of hippocampal X-irradiation-produced
granule-cell agenesis on instrumental runway performance in rats. Physiol Behav
13:485–494

1  The Discovery of Adult Mammalian Neurogenesis

45

Diaz-Granados JL, Greene PL, Amsel A (1994) Selective activity enhancement and persistence
in weanling rats after hippocampal x-irradiation in infancy. Behav Neural Biol 61:251–259
Englund C, Fink A, Lau C et al (2005) Pax6, Tbr 2, and TBR1 are expressed sequentially by
radial glia, intermediate progenitor cells, and postmitotic neurons in developing neocortex.
J Neurosci 25:247–251
Eriksson PS, Perfilieva E, Bjork-Eriksson T et  al (1998) Neurogenesis in the adult human
hippocampus. Nat Med 4:1313–1317
Garfield E (1981) The 1,000 contemporary scientists most-cited 1965–1978. Part I. The basic list
and introduction. Curr Contents 41:5–14
Gazzara RA, Altman J (1981) Early postnatal X-irradiation of the hippocampus and discrimination learning in adult rats. J Comp Physiol Psychol 95:484–495
Goldman SA, Nottebohm F (1983) Neuronal production, migration and differentiation in a vocal
control nucleus of the adult female canary brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 80:2390–2394
Gould E, Reeves AJ, Graziano MSA et al (1999) Neurogenesis in the neocortex of adult primates.
Science 286:548–552
Gross CG (2000) Neurogenesis in the adult brain: Death of a dogma. Nat Rev Neurosci 1:67–73
Haggbloom, SJ, Brunner RL, Bayer SA (1974) Effects of hippocampal granule-cell agenesis on
acquisition of escape from fear and one-way active-avoidance responses. J Comp Physiol
Psychol 95:86:447–457
Highfield DA, Hu D, Amsel A (1998) Alleviation of x-irradiation-based deficit in memory-based
learning by D-amphetamine: Suggestions for attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 95:5785–5788
Jacobson M (1970) Developmental Neurobiology. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston
Jacobson M (1978) Developmental Neurobiology. Second ed. New York: Plenum Press
Jessell TM (1991) Reactions of neurons to injury. In, Kandel E et al (eds) Principles of Neural
Science (Third ed), pp. 258–269. New York: Elsevier
Kaplan MS (2001) Environment complexity stimulates visual cortex neurogenesis: Death of a
dogma and a research career. Trends Neurosci 24:617–620
Kaplan MS, Hinds JW (1977) Neurogenesis in the adult rat: Electron microscopic analysis of light
radioautographs. Science 197:1092–1094
Kempermann G (2006) Adult Neurogenesis: Stem Cells and Neuronal Development in the Adult
Brain. New York: Oxford Univ Press
Kolb B, Pedersen B, Ballermann M et al (1999) Embryonic and postnatal injections of bromodeoxyuridine produce age-dependent morphological and behavioral abnormalities. J Neurosci
19:2337–2346
Kornack DR, Rakic P (1999) Continuation of neurogenesis in the hippocampus of the adult
macaque monkey. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:5768–5773
Lederberg J (1968) Stretching out the period of the brain’s development. Washington Post,
October 26, p. A15
Levitt P, Cooper ML, Rakic P (1981) Coexistence of neuronal and glial precursor cells in the
cerebral ventricular zone of the fetal monkey: An ultrastructural immunoperoxidase analysis.
J Neurosci 1:27–39
Lund RD (1978) Development and Plasticity of the Brain: An Introduction. New York: Oxford
Univ Press
Namba T, Mochizuki H, Onodera M et al (2005) The fate of neural progenitor cells expressing
astrocytic and radial glial markers in the postnatal rat dentate gyrus. Eur J Neurosci
22:1928–1941
Nottebohm F (2002) Neuronal replacement in adult brain. Brain Res Bull 57:737–749
Patterson PH, Purves D (1982) Readings in Developmental Neurobiology. Cold Spring Harbor,
NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Pellegrino LJ, Altman J (1979) Effects of differential interference with postnatal cerebellar
neurogenesis on motor performance, activity level, and maze learning of rats. J Comp Physiol
Psychol 93:1–33

46

J. Altman

Purves D, Lichtman JW (1985) Principles of Neural Development. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer
Associates
Rakic P (1985) Limits of neurogenesis in primates. Science 227:1054–1056
Rosselli-Austin L, Altman J (1979) The postnatal development of the main olfactory bulb of the
rat. J Dev Physiol 1:295–313
Schacher S (1981) Determination and differentiation in the development of the nervous system.
In, Kandel ER, Schwartz JH (eds) Principles of Neural Science, pp. 503–520. New York:
Elsevier
Sekerkova G, Ilijic E, Mugnaini E (2004) Bromodeoxyuridine administered during neurogenesis
of the projection neurons causes cerebellar defects in the rats. J Comp Neurol 470:221–239
Seri B, García-Verdugo JM, McEwen BS et al (2001) Astrocytes give rise to new neurons in the
adult mammalian hippocampus. J Neurosci 21:7153–7160
Smart I (1961) The subependymal layer of the mouse brain and its cell production as shown by
radioautography after thymidine-H3 injection. J Comp Neurol 116:325–347
Smart I, Leblond CP (1961) Evidence for division and transformations of neuroglia cells in the
mouse brain, as derived from radioautography after injection of thymidine-H3. J Comp Neurol
116:349–367
Steiner B, Kronenberg G, Jessberger S et al (2004) Differential regulation of gliogenesis in the
context of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in mice. Glia 46:41–52
Taupin P (2006) BrdU immunohistochemistry of studying adult neurogenesis: Paradigms, pitfalls,
limitations, and validation. Brain Res Rev 53:198–214

Chapter 2

Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model
for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain
Fernando Nottebohm

I dedicate this chapter to a true pioneer, Joseph Altman. He was first to
­publish evidence that some kinds of neurons of the mammalian brain are
produced post-natally and even in adulthood.

The discovery of neurogenesis in adult canaries came as a surprise because it was
found in a context where it had not been contemplated, the study of vocal learning.
To everybody’s disbelief, the new, spontaneously produced neurons replaced
numerically others that had died, a process of spontaneous brain self-repair or rejuvenation. I will describe how these discoveries came about and how they have helped
us understand the natural history of neurogenesis and neuronal replacement in adult
brain. Adult neurogenesis may also shed light on a basic issue of brain function:
what limits learning?

2.1 The Study of Vocal Learning
The study of vocal learning in birds was revolutionized in the early 1950s by the
use of an instrument, the sound spectrograph, that converted sounds recorded on
tape into a two dimensional display, the sound spectrogram (Fig. 2.1), that read like
a musical notation with time on the horizontal axis and frequency on the vertical
one (Thorpe, 1954). This technique enabled the collection and comparison of
sounds gathered during the entire vocal development of individual birds and the
side-by-side comparison of the sounds produced by different individuals. The soundspectrograph enabled the classical work of Thorpe (1958), Marler and Tamura
(1964), Marler (1970a) and Konishi (1965), which showed that vocal learning in
oscine songbirds: (1) occurred during a sensitive period, usually before sexual
maturity; (2) required intact hearing; (3) was preceded by the memorization of an
external model, that then guided changes in vocal output until that model was
matched. Both Thorpe (1955; Thorpe and Pilcher, 1958) and Marler (1970b)
F. Nottebohm (*)
The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA
e-mail: nottebo@rockefeller.edu
T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_2, © Springer 2011

47

48

F. Nottebohm

Fig. 2.1  (Figure 1 from Nottebohm and Nottebohm, 1978). A sound spectrogram of canary song.
Canaries sing by repeating many times a same “syllable”, then switching to the next syllable, that
is also repeated many times, and in this manner eventually producing the full repertoire of syllables that characterizes the song of that individual. Each syllable is composed of 1–3 elements,
each followed by a brief silent gap. Each sound is produced at is “fundamental” frequency as well
as at higher “harmonics”. In this visual display of sound, frequency in Kilohertz is represented in
the vertical axis and time, in seconds, in the horizontal axis. The horizontal bar on the lower left
represents a 0.5 s duration

emphasized that song imitation was preceded by a stage of vocal experimentation,
called “subsong”, that was reminiscent of infant babbling. These new tools and
observations suggested that songbirds would provide a good animal model for
studying vocal learning in general, and this drew a lot of interest.
There are two general issues about vocal learning: how it occurs in the individual,
including its ontogeny, and how it evolved. Both are related, but we do not know
how. Because of this uncertainty, the origins of vocal learning have always been
­difficult to imagine. It is widely accepted that in the process of evolution new traits
emerge from variability in pre-existing ones. Unlearned vocal repertoires, as those
found in domestic fowl, Gallus domesticus (Konishi, 1963) and ring-doves,
Streptopelia risoria (Nottebohm and Nottebohm, 1971), develop normally even
when individuals are deafened a few days after hatching. How does one go from this
situation, thought to be the primitive one, to one in which vocal ontogeny becomes
more dependent on hearing – and eventually on imitation – and how does one do this
transition so that all intervening evolutionary stages serve animal communication?
That was a paradox that, early on, caught my attention (Nottebohm, 1972a).

2.2 Two Sound Sources and Left Hemispheric Dominance
The appeal of vocal learning in birds as a model system became even stronger when
work with chaffinches, Fringilla coelebs, (the subjects of Thorpe’s 1958 article)
showed functional asymmetry in their vocal organ, the syrinx. The chaffinch syrinx
consists of right and left anatomically symmetrical and functionally independent
halves, each with its own supply of airflow, muscular control and innervation (Fig. 2.2).

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

49

Fig. 2.2  (Figure 3 from Nottebohm, 1971b). Schematic drawing of the vocal tract of songbirds.
The syrinx, vocal organ of birds, is at the confluence of the two bronchi and the trachea. It is
­surrounded by an air space, the interclavicular air sac (icas). The syrinx has several pairs of intrinsic
muscles, represented here just as a stippled muscle mass; the sternotrachealis muscle (m.st.tr.)
anchors the syrinx to the sternum (not shown). The tracheolateralis muscle (m.tr.l) runs along the
full length of the tracheal and its contraction or relaxation allow the trachea to conform to the
neck’s posture; the rostral pull of m.tr.l is countered by the caudal pull of the m.st.tr. The larynx
is open during phonation, but otherwise does not generate sound. The muscles of trachea and
syrinx are innervated by the tracheosyringeal nerve (t.s.), a branch of the hypoglossus nerve (XII).
Section of the ts. nerve on one side, or section of its roots (h’, h”, c), blocks vocal control on the
ipsilateral side of the syrinx

Yet I found that most of the sounds of chaffinch song were produced by the left
syringeal half, which therefore was dominant for song. This situation was uncannily
reminiscent of handedness in humans. Moreover, this dominance could be reversed
if the left syringeal half was denervated early on. This suggested that peripherally
both sides were equipotential but that a central bias – like left cerebral dominance for
speech and handedness in humans – determined which syringeal half normally did
most of the singing (Nottebohm, 1971b, 1972b; DeVoogd et al., 1991). We now had
three human traits – vocal learning, left hemispheric dominance and handedness – for
which the basic biology could be investigated in songbirds.
The next step was to extend the findings of left syringeal dominance in chaffinches to another songbird, such as the canary, Serinus canaria, that could be bred

50

F. Nottebohm

in captivity. I was eager then to go into the brain to see how the traits that interested
me – vocal learning, hemispheric dominance – were represented there and how they
developed. A stereotaxic atlas of the canary brain was produced (Stokes et  al.,
1974), modeled after that of pigeons, Columba livia, and using the same terminology
(Karten and Hodos, 1967). Once this work was done we set out to uncover the brain
pathways that control the performance of the syrinx.

2.3 The Song System
The results were gratifying. Over the next 10 or so years a system of anatomically
discreet nuclei and connecting pathways was identified and shown to control vocal
output and vocal learning in songbirds (Nottebohm et  al., 1976, 1982; Okuhata
and Saito, 1987; Bottjer et al., 1984, 1989). I called this array of nuclei and pathways “the song system”. It was the first time that we had, for any vertebrate, an
array of nuclei and pathways that was associated, apparently exclusively, with the
acquisition and production of a particular learned behavior. This came as a surprise
because, under the influence of Karl Lashley (1950), the neural substrate for
learned skills in vertebrates was still thought to be widely distributed throughout
the brain. Our findings placed the song system conceptually closer to the functional centers conceived by von Holst (1935) and von Holst and St. Paul (1960)
and to the simple networks of invertebrates that were proving so helpful in studying simple patterns of behavior (e.g. Huber, 1960; Bullock, 1961; Roeder, 1962;
Wiersma, 1962; Wilson, 1961) and that eventually, in the sea slug Aplysia, became
so important for understanding simple learning paradigms (Kandel, 2006).
The song system can be thought of as consisting of four modules, shown schematically in Fig. 2.3 and in greater detail in Fig. 2.4. The full name of the forebrain
nuclei that are part of the song system appears in the legend for Fig. 2.4. Module #1
is composed of brainstem nuclei that control the muscles for respiration and phonation. Module #2 is a descending motor pathway in caudal forebrain that tells
module #1 what to do (Nottebohm et al., 1976; Yu and Margoliash, 1996; Hahnloser
et  al., 2002). Module #3 is a forebrain module that loops through basal ganglia
(Area X) and thalamus (DLM) and then returns to anterior forebrain (LMAN), from
where it projects to nucleus RA of module #2; module #3 is necessary for song
learning but not for the production of learned song (Bottjer et al., 1984; Scharff and
Nottebohm, 1991; Brainard and Doupe, 2000; Kao et al., 2005; Oelveczky et al.,
2005; Andalman and Fee, 2009; but see Aronov et al., 2008). Module #4 consists
of the ascending auditory pathway and its relays to modules #2 and #3 (Vates et al.,
1996). Modules 2 and 3 have their origin in a same nucleus, the High Vocal Center
(HVC), which also receives auditory input (Cardin and Schmidt, 2004; Dave et al.,
1998; Janata and Margoliash, 1999; Katz and Gurney, 1981; Margoliash, 1986;
Vates et  al., 1996; Williams and Nottebohm, 1985). The blend of auditory and
motor capabilities, the absence of muscle representation and its high position in the
descending vocal pathways, make HVC reminiscent of Broca’s area in humans and

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

51

Fig. 2.3  (Figure 4 from Nottebohm, 1993). Schematic diagram of a songbird’s brain (rostral to
right, caudal to left). The four numbered arrows stand for the four song system “modules”
described in the text

justify its name as the high vocal center. This name is justified, too, by elegant
neurophysiological work that strongly suggests that HVC, more than any other
nucleus of the song system, plays a key role in the patterning of learned song (Yu and
Margoliash, 1996; Hahnloser et al., 2002; Long and Fee, 2008). Moreover, recent
evidence shows synaptic changes occur in this nucleus as new song is learned
(Roberts et al., 2010), supporting an earlier correlation between the complexity of
learned song and dendritic spine density in HVC (Airey et al., 2000). In addition to
the four modules shown, there are feedback loops between different parts of the
song system (Vates and Nottebohm, 1995; Vates et al., 1997).

2.4 Sexual Dimorphism
Song is a seasonal behavior and, perhaps not surprisingly, the song system of songbirds has androgen and estrogen receptors that make it very sensitive to gonadal
hormones (Arnold et al., 1976). This might have prepared us for the next observation, which, however, came as a surprise. Once careful anatomical details were on
hand from sufficient individuals, we realized that the song system of canaries was
sexually dimorphic: Area X (homologous to the striatum of mammalian basal
­ganglia, see Fig. 2.3) was 3.8 times larger in male than in female canaries, while

52

F. Nottebohm

Fig.  2.4  More detailed, but still schematic, representation of the song system’s pathways. The
shading of the various arrows conforms to that used in Fig. 2.3 and shows which pathways are
part of the different modules. The ascending auditory pathway (#4) is here represented as a short
arrow that touches HVC. All pathways shown here are ipsilateral

the male / female ratios for HVC and RA were, respectively 3.2 and 2.7. We thought
this dimorphism might reflect the fact that whereas male canaries sing relatively
large and complex learned song repertoires and the sounds produced are very
­stereotyped (Waser and Marler, 1977; Marler and Waser, 1977; Nottebohm et al.,
1986), female canaries sing much less and when they sing, their song is simpler and
the sounds more variable (Nottebohm, 1980b). In zebra finches, Taeniopygia guttata, in which females never sing, the male/female differences in size of song nuclei
were twice as large as in canaries (Nottebohm and Arnold, 1976).
These observations raised the obvious question. Did the male and female
song nuclei have different developmental histories or did the differences observed
in adulthood reflect current levels of circulating hormones. There was a precedent
for the latter explanation in the rodent preoptic area (Raisman and Field, 1971).
Our work and that of others indicates that both mechanisms play a role in the sexual
dimorphism of the song system. The size of song nuclei, including HVC, could be
made to double by systemic administration of testosterone to adult female canaries
over a period of 3–4 weeks. During this time the females started to sing more and
more and the sounds produced became more stereotyped and like those of adult

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

53

males. However the number of syllable types in their song remained small and their
song nuclei were still significantly smaller than those of adult males (Nottebohm,
1980a). Closer inspection revealed that in nucleus RA (Fig.  2.3) the hormonedriven growth in female volume was associated with the growth of dendrites and
formation of new synapses (DeVoogd and Nottebohm, 1981; DeVoogd et al., 1985;
Canady et al., 1988).
In addition to the role of hormones in adulthood, the sexual dimorphism
observed in the song system of temperate area songbirds owes much to differences
that emerge during development. The song nuclei of male and female zebra finches –
the species now most commonly used in studies of vocal learning in birds – are very
similar until day 30 after hatching. After then, many of the cells in the female nuclei
atrophy and die and the female song control nuclei shrivel; this effect is prevented
by treating the female zebra finches with estrogen before day 30; when these
females are given testosterone as adults they sing like males (Gurney and Konishi,
1980; Gurney, 1981; Simpson and Vicario, 1991). In addition to the role of gonadal
hormones during ontogeny and in adulthood, other genetic differences between
males and females contribute also to the sexual dimorphism of the song system
(Wade and Arnold, 1996; Agate et al., 2003, 2004), but that is a story beyond
the scope of the present review. What matters, for the present story, is that by 1980
we knew that the anatomy of the adult song system of canaries was very sensitive
to testosterone.

2.5 The Late Ontogeny of the Song System
Even as studies of the anatomy and hormonal sensitivity of the song system raced
ahead, we also focused on the behavior of song learning – its timing and manner of
occurrence. Male canaries in our breeding colonies followed the natural photoperiod of New York State. They started breeding in late March and stopped in mid
July. Starting at approximately 40 days after hatching, juveniles produced variable,
low amplitude patterns of frequency modulation called “subsong”, reminiscent of
the babbling of infants. These sounds occurred in a non-communicatory context,
often as the young bird with feathers fluffed and eyes closed seemed to doze. By
3 months of age these sounds were louder and by 4 most of the adult sounds were
already present, though still delivered in a variable manner as “plastic song”.
Stereotyped adult song was first used in early spring, when the birds were in full
breeding condition. In all these respects, canaries were not different from many
other songbirds, such as the chaffinch (Thorpe, 1958), that acquire their learned
song during their first year of life. Our canaries differed, though, in one important
respect, they continued to change their song in successive years and for this reason
we called them “open-ended learners” (Nottebohm and Nottebohm, 1978;
Nottebohm et al., 1986, 1987).
It was of great interest to me that telencephalic nuclei such as HVC and RA grew
dramatically during the juvenile period of song acquisition. By day 15 after hatching

54

F. Nottebohm

the brain of a young male canary had already achieved full adult weight, yet the
volume of HVC 30 days after hatching was 20% that of an adult 1-year-old male.
RA at that time had 30% of its adult volume. Both RA and HVC showed a very
marked spurt of growth from the thirtieth to the 60th day after hatching. At 60 days
the volume of HVC was close to 50% that of an adult 1-year-old male (Nottebohm,
1980b, 1989). If these changes in volume accompanied the learning of a new song,
what happened in successive years? Would new episode’s of song learning be
accompanied by further anatomical changes in HVC and RA?

2.6 Brain Seasonal Changes
The blood testosterone levels of our adult male canaries dropped in mid-summer
and soon thereafter the birds started molting their feathers. During the molt, male
canaries sang very little if at all and the song of those that sang tended to be variable
and reminiscent of that of juveniles (Nottebohm et al., 1987). The size of HVC and
RA of males in breeding condition killed in April, when 12 months old, was 1.99
and 1.77 times larger, respectively, than that of other males of the same cohort
killed in mid-September, after the end of the molt. Since another study had shown
that the size of these two nuclei did not differ significantly between 1-, 2- and
3-year-old males (Nottebohm et al., 1981), I inferred that the reduction in volume
observed in late summer was temporary. The results of this seasonal comparison
were published in Science under the title of “A brain for all seasons” (Nottebohm,
1981). The late summer reduction in volume seen in the song nuclei of the males
seemed like the inverse of the doubling in volume seen in the testosterone-treated
females. In addition, I indicated that there were also whole brain changes, such that
the weight of brains collected in September was 15% lighter than that of brains
collected in April. What to make of this?
Towards the end of the 1981 Science article I wrote: “I hypothesize that the
acquisition of a new motor coordination or of a new auditory-motor integration is
made possible or facilitated by the growth of new dendritic segments and the
­consequent opportunity to form new synapses. The plasticity offered by such a
scheme is potentially twofold: to allow for the formation of new interneuronal
relations and to bring into existence synapses that have not yet been altered by
previous patterns of use. Seasonal changes in the volume of HVC and RA may
reflect the amount of plastic substrate that can be exploited for such learning
­purposes. According to this hypothesis the plastic substrate for vocal learning is
renewed once yearly, a growing, then a shedding of synapses, much the way trees
grow leaves in the spring and shed them in the fall.” This interpretation was in line
with the Zeitgeist in the neurosciences at that time because it assumed that the
plasticity required for learning was vested solely in the synapses. It was in line,
too, with our observation that in females testosterone induced dendritic growth and
the addition of new synapses.

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

55

2.7 Space for Learning and Memory
The seasonal ebb and flow of the brain’s space for song fitted well with another
observation. Extensive song recordings from 25 adult male canaries of the Belgian
Wasserschlager strain were scored for the number of different “song syllables”
produced by each bird – “syllables” being the units of repetition produced in canary
song (Fig. 2.1). The birds were killed after their song was recorded and the volume
of their HVC estimated from serial histological sections. An interesting correlation
emerged (Fig.  2.5): a large HVC was a poor predictor of how many different
­syllables a canary might sing, but birds with a large syllable count tended to have a
large HVC. Conversely, if HVC was relatively small, the associated syllable count
tended to be relatively small (Nottebohm et al., 1981). This relation between the
complexity of learned song and the amount of brain space for learned song was
subsequently corroborated in another songbird (Canady et al., 1984) and in studies
comparing many species (DeVoogd et al., 1993).
These space/learning relations suggested that brain space for a particular learned
skill might be in short supply. However, if birds such as the canary were able to
learn new song repertoires every year, then perhaps there was always more space
available. The seasonal changes in volume observed in HVC and RA offered a

Fig. 2.5  (Figure 1 from Nottebohm et al., 1981). Regression of size of syllable repertoire on the
volume of left HVC for 25 adult male canaries

56

F. Nottebohm

solution to this conundrum: perhaps as songs were discarded, so was the substrate
that held them; then, as a new substrate was generated, new songs could be learned
once again. This interpretation suggested that a better understanding of the “space”
eliminated would provide a clue to how and where the memories of learned song
were stored.

2.8 Always the Same Neurons?
Our thinking so far had gone along with the commonly accepted view that learning
could be explained by changes in synaptic number and synaptic efficacy. This idea
had been advanced initially by two Italians, Lugaro and Tanzi, whose thoughts were
quoted and further developed by Santiago Ramon y Cajal in his Croonian Lectures
to the Royal Society of London . Cajal said: “Mental training cannot better the
organization of the brain by adding to the number of cells; we know that nervous
elements have lost the property of multiplication past the embryonic life; but it is
possible to imagine that mental exercise facilitates a greater development of the
protoplasmic apparatus and of the nervous collaterals in the part of the brain in use.
In this way, pre-existing connections between groups of cells could be reinforced
by multiplication of the terminal branches of protoplasmic appendix and nervous
collaterals. But the preexisting connections could also be reinforced by the formation
of new collaterals and protoplasmic expansions.” (Cajal, 1894, p. 466). These “connections” are now called “synapses”. Two researchers Jerzy Konorski (1948) and
Donald Hebb (1949) formalized the role of synapses in learning and subsequent
workers spelled out the chemistry of how these synaptic changes come about and
how long they last (review in Kandel, 2006).
Then, one evening, as I was enjoying a hot, end of day shower I found myself
thinking once again about the seasonal changes in HVC and RA volume, and how
these changes were more pronounced in HVC than in RA. What were the ­underlying
mechanisms and need they be the same in both cases? We really had no evidence
that the dendrites of males grew and withdrew seasonally, this was just an inference
based on the observation of dendritic growth in females treated with testosterone.
We did not know if in our seasonal comparisons we were always dealing with the
same collection of neurons. Could neurons come and go? Might there be conditions
under which neurons were born and conditions under which neurons were eliminated and replaced? It was fun to think in this manner, perhaps because it was so
different from all I had been taught and because if this budding idea were true, the
implications would be big.
There was in my laboratory at the time a very bright and resourceful doctoral
student, Steve Goldman, who had not yet chosen a topic for his thesis work. I told
him of my fantasy about neuronal comings and goings and to this day remember
the amused smile that crossed his face. He knew of a quick way to test it, but, he
asked me, “do not talk about this to anyone. People will wonder about the lab if
word gets out.” I agreed to keep mum and he told me about tritiated thymidine.
3H-thymidine could be used as a marker of DNA synthesis and therefore as a

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

57

presumptive marker of birth date as DNA doubled during the S-phase preceding
mitosis. He added that this method was widely used by embryologists staging the
order in which different populations of cells were produced (Messier et al., 1958;
review in Korr, 1980). 3H-thymidine administered systemically remained in the
blood for a short time before it was metabolized and it was only during that brief
period that it was available for uptake by cells. This tool would tell us whether new
neurons were added when the size of song nuclei doubled.

2.9 3H-Labeled Cells in Adult HVC
We tested for adult neurogenesis in adult female canaries in which, we knew,
­testosterone treatment would roughly double the volume of HVC and RA. Each
bird received six intramuscular injections of 50 uCi of 3H-thymidine at 8 h intervals
over a 2 day period, starting at various intervals after the hormone implant. Most
birds were killed 37 days after onset of hormone treatment. Brain levels showing
HVC and RA were sectioned at 6  um intervals and the sections incubated for
autoradiography. After incubation they were stained with cresyl violet. Six kinds of
cells were recognized: (1) large (10–18 um soma diameter) cells with clear nuclei
and dark-staining, central nucleoli and scant cytoplasm, which were tentatively
identified as neurons; (2) smaller cells (6–10  um) containing light nuclei with
stippled heterochromatin, small eccentric nucleoli and scant cytoplasm, which we
considered astrocytes; (3) small cells (5–8 um) with deeply basophilic cytoplasm,
small nuclei and dark karyoplasm, considered to be oligodendrocytes; (4) thin,
fusiform perivascular cells, clearly endothelial; (5) very small (4–6  um) cells of
variable morphology lining the lateral ventricle over HVC, which were presumed
to be ependymal and subependymal cells jointly referred to as ventricular zone
cells; (6) cells of uncertain identify. These rather simple criteria, we felt, might
under-estimate neuron numbers, but we preferred to err on the conservative side.
Using this material, a cell was considered labeled if it had five or more exposed
silver grains per nucleus – background was exceedingly low in our material. To
validate our light-microscopic criteria for neuronal identification, we cut the
brains of some of the 3H-thymidine-treated birds at alternating 1 um and 100 nm
intervals. We reasoned that a light microscopic neuronal profile that was one
micron thick was very unlikely to include over a labeled cell contaminating material from another cell type, e.g. a glia, that contributed the label, and that an adjacent 100 nm section could be used for electro-microscopy to see if the ultrastructural
details of the labeled cell conformed with those of a neuron. Electron microscopy
revealed details in labeled cells identified as “neurons” – extensive rough endoplasmic reticulum, homogeneous nucleoplasm, long processes filled with microtubules and in one case an apparent axonal hillock – that were compatible with
this identification, but we failed to see in these cells any unambiguous synaptic
profiles. The other cell types looked very different under the electron microscope.
Our counts indicated that 0.9–2.0% of the cells that we identified under the light
microscope as “neurons” were labeled per day of 3H-thymidine treatment when

58

F. Nottebohm

the birds were killed 18 or more days after the last 3H-thymidine injection, with no
labeled “neurons” in the HVC of two birds that received their 3H-thymidine
1–2 days before they were killed. In the latter two cases, however, the ventricular
zone above HVC was blanketed with small cells whose nuclei were tritium labeled,
while within HVC only endothelial and glia cells were labeled. Under none of
the survival times we used were there any 3H-labeled “neurons” in RA.
We inferred from these results that if new neurons were recruited into adult
HVC, they were not produced by the division of existing HVC neurons, because if
that had been the case, labeled neurons would have occurred in HVC even at short
survival times. The short-term heavy labeling of cells in the ventricular zone above
HVC suggested that this might be the place of birth of the new neurons.
Unexpectedly, the numbers of labeled neurons were similar in the females that
received testosterone as in those that received cholesterol or empty silastic implants.
Since male and female carduelines were known to continue to modify their calls
in adulthood (Mundinger, 1970), we speculated that the new neurons of females
might be involved with this kind of vocal learning. Finally, since the numbers of
cells we called neurons seemed to be recruited at a rather high rate, yet the size of
the female HVC did not change significantly between successive years (Nottebohm
et  al., 1981), we thought that perhaps the new cells replaced numerically older
ones that had died, a phenomenon for which there was a precedent in the olfactory
epithelium (Graziadei and Monti Graziadei, 1978).
I invited Pasko Rakic, the Yale developmental neurobiologist and a great skeptic
of adult neurogenesis, to be a member of Steve Godman’s thesis committee and he
graciously accepted. He came to the laboratory and looked over the histological
material. He accepted the results, but we all acknowledged that there were still
loose ends and that much more work needed to be done. Those results were scrutinized, too, by the great embryologist Viktor Hamburger, who communicated them
for publication in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences and that is
how the first report of adult neurogenesis in songbirds came to be (Goldman and
Nottebohm, 1983).
Our results and interpretations were tentative because: (1) There could be in the
brain cells that by some criteria looked neuronal, yet played some other role. (2) We
were not sure that the labeling we saw resulted from DNA synthesis that accompanied mitotic events. Successive 3H-thymidine injections might create labeling
cycles whereby tritium incorporated into DNA during spontaneous, on-going DNA
repair induced damage that was followed by more DNA repair and 3H-labeling,
followed by more damage and repair and so on. (3) Even if the cells were neurons,
we had no evidence that they were part of functioning circuits and that they played
a specific role in behavior. (4) The whole phenomenon could be a laboratory artifact that resulted from the highly restricted and monotonous conditions under
which our captive birds were kept. Because of these uncertainties, our claims were
no less vulnerable to criticism than those of Joseph Altman, of whose work we had
learned while preparing our results for publication. Altman and others had claimed
to have evidence of post-natal and adult neurogenesis in mammals (Altman and
Das, 1965; Altman, 1969; Bayer et al., 1982; Kaplan and Hinds, 1977), but their

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

59

work had met strong resistance. To overcome this resistance, our evidence would
have to be more compelling.

2.10 Hope for a New Neurology
I organized in 1984 a conference in New York on the topic of “Hope for a New
Neurology”, underwritten by Jane and Peter Pattison’s Institute for Child
Development Research. The intention was to review what was known about a
­number of brain neurodegenerative disorders, evidence for recovery following
lesion, the possible therapeutic value of transplants and the emerging field of adult
neurogenesis. Among those invited was Shirley Bayer, Joseph Altman’s wife, who
continued his work. Altman, who had retired, was in the audience. I have often
regretted that I did not invite Joseph Altman himself to be a speaker, for he would
have had so much to say about a subject he knew so well. Also there was Pasko
Rakic, whose work on brain development I admired. I knew Rakic was not convinced that adult neurogenesis was real and I wanted him present as a critic. It was
in that context that he said: “Extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence”.
Of course, the claims he found extraordinary were extraordinary only when placed
next to the 100-year old dogma that adult neurogenesis couldn’t, shouldn’t and
didn’t happen. Rakic felt that evidence for adult neurogenesis in mammals would
be believable only when the facts in its favor could not be explained in any other
way. Rakic (1985a,b) felt that he knew what he was talking about. He had looked
for evidence of post-natal or adult neurogenesis in close to 10,000 sections from the
brains of 10 Rhesus macaques of both sexes that had received injections of
3H-thymidine at ages ranging from 6 months to 5 years. He did not find a single
“heavily labeled” (15–20 exposed silver grains) cell that met his criteria of neuronal
identity. His definition of “heavily labeled” was that of a neuron with at least half
the maximum number of exposed silver grains found over the nucleus of other
cell types known to continue to divide in adulthood. I admired Rakic’s integrity
and high standards of proof, but could not understand how the same man that was
willing to accept the possibility that adult neurogenesis occurred in birds still
argued so vehemently against its occurrence in mammals. Possibly he thought
about these matters as a medical man. If adult neurogenesis did not occur in primates – and he had found zero evidence of it – and only rarely if at all in other
mammals, then the data from other species were irrelevant to “hopes for a new
neurology”. His was a defensible position.

2.11 The Role of Joseph Altman
The negative results reported by Rakic pertained to macaques, and he did not rule
out the possibility that earlier reports of post-natal neurogenesis in rodents and cats
might be correct. Among those earlier reports were those of Joseph Altman (1962),

60

F. Nottebohm

to whom I alluded earlier. It is of interest that although Altman gained attention
in the minds of many as first to challenge Cajal’s assertion – and that of many
neuroanatomists that came after him – that no new neurons were produced after
the end of embryonic development, he (Altman) thought it had been done before.
To quote from lines 6–10 of Altman and Das (1965), “It was recognized in the
nineteenth century (Lahousse, 1988; Schaper, 1894; Cajal, 1911) that a class of
small nerve cells, the granule cells, shows a high rate of proliferative activity in the
cerebellar cortex in young animals. Likewise, good quantitative evidence was
obtained some time ago (Sugita, 1918) of an increase in the total number of nerve
cells in the cerebral cortex of rats up to the 20th day after birth.” All the same,
Altman’s initial and subsequent findings on adult neurogenesis (e.g. Altman, 1963)
were resisted and this lingering resistance was in evidence at the time of the Hope
for a New Neurology conference on April 16–18, 1984. Reasons for resistance
were technical and not trivial. For example, it was possible that in some cases
“label” over the nucleus of a neuron came from an overlying fragment of nuclear
glia. Thin (1 um), contiguous labeled sections of “neurons” and adjacent thinner
ones inspected under the electron microscope were necessary to establish the
source of label and to bolster the neuronal identification. In 1984 the evidence of
this kind for cells born in adult mammalian brain was sparse (Kaplan and Hinds,
1977) or inadequate. The electron-microscopic evidence of post-natal neurogenesis
presented by Kaplan (1985) at the Hope for a New Neurology conference came
from a 9-day-old rat, hardly an adult. Moreover, it was possible that DNA duplication occurred in differentiated cells leading to polyploidy, without this necessitating
the formation of new neurons. It was even possible, as Altman acknowledged, that
the 3H-label seen in the nucleus of cells resulted not from the synthesis of new
DNA during the S-phase of mitosis, but from a slow turnover of DNA. It is of interest
that Altman (1962) countered this concern by pointing out that some neurons
showed intense labeling as soon as 1  day after 3H-thymidine injection, which is
now considered also too soon for a cell to be born, migrate and differentiate into its
adult neuronal phenotype. Finally, skeptics adduced that the neuronal identity of
labeled cells had not been sufficiently established. Perhaps, under some conditions,
synaptic contacts were made on glia? The point is, a skeptic can always find some
reason to doubt what it does not want to believe and it is up to the scientist making
the claim to meet all these potential difficulties so that, at the end, the interpretation
offered is the only one, or most likely one to account for all known facts.
As suggested above, some of the original skepticism may have been justified.
In addition, Altman reported in his 1962 paper in Science that bilateral electrolytic
lesions in the lateral geniculate body of “young adult” rats, followed by intraperitoneal injections of 3H-thymidine, resulted in the labeling of neurons in cortex,
including “a few labeled pyramidal cells”. This claim, without intervening electrolytic lesions, appears again in his 1963, Anatomical Record publication, where
labeled cortical neurons (including a photograph of a labeled pyramidal cell)
appeared after administration of 3H-thymidine to young adult rats and adult cats of
unknown age. Some 48 years later, the topic of endogenous addition of new neurons
to the adult mammalian cortex remains controversial, with only a small scatter of

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

61

positive entries (Gould et al., 1999; Magavi et al., 2000; Dayer et al., 2005) and a
persistence of negative reports (Breunig et al., 2007; Koketsu et al., 2003; Kornack
and Rakic, 2001; Rakic, 2002).
There was also an interesting semantic issue. Cajal (1894) had stated that the
central nervous system ceased to add new neurons “past the embryonic life”, but
presumably this need not mean that there was a sudden stop at the moment of hatching or when a mammal was born. Some species are born at earlier developmental
stages than others – with extremes, for example in marsupials. Even among rodents,
mice and rats are born at an earlier developmental stage than guinea pigs. In short,
in some species processes associated with embryogeny continue in parts of the brain
that are still developing after birth. Two examples of this were known at the time
Altman started his work – one was the cerebellum (Uzman, 1960; Miale and
Sidman, 1961); the other was the hippocampus (Angevine, 1965). A third area, the
subependymal layer in the anterior reaches of the lateral ventricle was known to
continue to show mitotic activity into adolescence and adulthood (Bryans, 1959;
Messier et al., 1958). Altman’s focus on these three areas showed, after 1965, that
new cells that he identified as granular neurons (“microneurons”) continued to be
added post-natally to cerebellum, olfactory bulb and dentate gyrus, and that this
addition continued into adulthood in the case of the latter two structures. His inferences from these observations were extensively presented in his reviews (Altman,
1967, 1969 and 1970). Altman’s overarching theory was that macroneurons formed
early in the development of the brain and established “hard-wired” circuits. Microneurons
– in some cases at least – developed late because the fine details of their connectivity
were influenced by events that happened late, when the young animals first encountered their post-natal environment. He was not dogmatic about this view, but rather,
echoing the style of his 1962 title (“Are new neurons formed in the brains of adult
mammals?”), his thoughts this time also came with a question mark, and I quote
from his 1967 review (p.741): “Is the proliferation of the precursors of microneurons
delayed in altricial mammals until birth because their function is a post-natal one –
that of adjusting the genetically specified programs of behavior in accordance with
information about specific environmental conditions as it is acquired by the growing
animal?” It was a good question that placed order on the facts known to him.
Moreover, Altman used his insights about the late development of some brain circuits to explain why some kinds of learning might be difficult, or absent in young
altricial mammals (Altman and Bulut, 1976). We now remember Joseph Altman for
the things that, in the 1960s, he got right: (1) Olfactory bulb granule cells continue
to be produced after birth and into adulthood and are born in the subventricular zone
of the lateral ventricles, from where they migrate rostrally to the bulb; (2) Granule cells
of the dentate gyrus continue to be produced post-natally and into adulthood, as was
confirmed by the beautiful work of his wife, Shirley Bayer, that presented her results
at the 1984 Hope for a New Neurology conference; (3) post-natal neurogenesis in
cerebellum; (4) the late neurogenesis that occurs in some brain systems of altricial
mammals can explain the late occurrence of some kinds of learning. He was the first,
in modern times, to challenge the 100  year old dogma that neurogenesis stops at
birth and, despite strong opposition, persevered with this claim and was right.

62

F. Nottebohm

Moreover, though the information accumulated by Altman during the 1960s was in
the public domain, he was one of few that not only believed in it, but also used it to
formulate bold new hypotheses. His titles reflected caution, preferring the use of
“post-natal” to that of “adult” neurogenesis (Altman, 1967, 1970).
In some ways, the great battle fought in 1984 between Pasko Rakic and those
that wanted to discard the “no new neurons in adulthood” dogma was a matter of
emphasis. It was a matter of the greatest interest to neurosurgeons and neurologists
to know what kinds of repair potential were spontaneously available in the brain of
their patients, and what kinds might be “turned on”. That is why observations on
primates or other mammals were so important, because they were the closest to
potential clinical applications. But there was also a deeper issue. Was neurogenesis
in the adult vertebrate brain possible at all? Where, if anywhere in the adult brain,
were new neurons produced? From what cell types? Could neurons born in adult
brain migrate from birth site to work site? Would they be able to join existing circuits?
If these feats were possible in the brains of some vertebrates, then the “no neurons
in adulthood” dogma was overly severe and the study of adult neurogenesis became
not only more interesting but also a source of hope.
By the time of the 1984 “Hope for a New Neurology” conference postnatal
neurogenesis was known to occur in a number of cold-blooded vertebrates whose
body, eyes and brain continued to grow after sexual maturity (Anderson and
Waxman, 1985; Birse et al., 1980; Easter, 1983; Graziadei and DeHan, 1973; Johns,
1982; Leonard et al., 1978; Raymond and Easter, 1983); in addition, adult neurogenesis had been shown to occur in the olfactory epithelium of mammals (Graziadei
and Monti Graziadei, 1978, 1985). These reports had not met the level of skepticism ­generated by Joseph Altman’s claims about new neuron formation in the brain
of adult mammals. Perhaps the evidence from cold-blooded vertebrates and from
the olfactory mucosa was not seen as relevant to the “no neurons in adulthood”
dogma and so no big battle was fought over those observations.
Ironically, both sides could claim a measure of victory in the disputes over
­neurogenesis in the brain of warm-blooded vertebrates. No embryologist doubted in
1984 or doubts now that the vast majority of the neurons present in the central nervous system of eutherian mammals are produced during embryogeny and not later.
By this measure, the “no new neurons in adulthood dogma” was 99.9% right. Yet, if
the exceptions discovered by Altman were confirmed, the consequences for the brain
sciences could be great. We found the field polarized in this manner when we started
our work on neurogenesis in songbirds and we went after the basic data that would
test the reality of this phenomenon and, if real, its manner of occurrence.

2.12 Are They Really Adult-Born Neurons?
The procedure we used to test for adult neurogenesis in female canaries also
yielded positive results in males. Moreover, in both cases new neurons occurred
through much of the telencephalon, so the phenomenon was not restricted to the

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

63

song system. However, there were no neurons that met stringent criteria for
3H-labeling outside of telencephalon: none in the diencephalons, mesencephalon,
cerebellum or brain stem. Since the telencephalon had been traditionally associated
with learning and higher brain functions, maybe we had to think of the new cells in
that context (Nottebohm, 1984). But we first had to resolve two questions: (1) was
the labeling observed evidence of birth? (2) Were the new cells really neurons? The
answer to the first of these questions came from a low-tech observation. We got the
answer to the first of these questions by comparing the number of exposed silver
grains over the nuclei of endothelial, glia and neuronal nuclei in HVC. The numbers
were very similar for all three cell types. True, peaks of label (45 and 40 exposed
silver grains, respectively) occurred over the nuclei of glial and endothelial cells,
compared to 25 exposed silver grains in neurons, but the rest of the histogram
­distributions were very similar in the three cell types. Perhaps glia and endothelia
collected more label because of their greater proximity to capillary blood? What
mattered was that there was not an order of magnitude difference in amount of
labeling when comparing glia and endothelia vs. neurons. The distributions of label
argued, instead, for a common process, the formation of new DNA during the
S-phase preceding mitosis (Nottebohm, 1985).
But were the labeled “neurons”, neurons? Our initial evidence from electron
microscopy had been a bit disappointing in that we found no synaptic profiles on
the soma of HVC labeled “neurons” from adult female canaries (Goldman and
Nottebohm, 1983). This issue was revisited by Gail Burd, an electron-microscopist
in my laboratory. The protocol she followed was similar to that used by Steve
Goldman, but she used HVC samples from adult male canaries, rather than females
as in the previous study. Not only did she show in this material that contiguous
1-mm thick sections of a same “neuron” showed nuclear labeling – further reducing
the likelihood of glial “contamination” – but she found that these cells received in
their somata three different kinds of synapses, characterized by synaptic vesicles of
different size and density. Electron-microscopic examination of these cells revealed
also other standard features of neuronal ultra-structure (Burd and Nottebohm,
1985). We felt this was encouraging, but still not conclusive.
The next test was more stringent and, as so often in my career, I was lucky that
the right person, John Paton, a neurophysiologist of impeccable standards, was at
that time in my laboratory. The approach, again, was simple: we knew that if we
injected adult canaries twice daily with 3H-labeled thymidine for a period of
2 weeks and killed the birds 1 month after the last injection, approximately 10% of
the neurons in HVC reached our labeling criterion. This meant that if we used in
such birds an electrode to penetrate cells in HVC, one in ten of neurons randomly
entered would be labeled. We used beveled micropipettes containing a solution of
horseradish peroxidase (HRP) in KCl. The pipette was slowly advanced into HVC.
Penetrations of cells were accompanied by a negative d-c shift in electrical potential
and cells were identified as neurons by the presence of spontaneous or depolarizationinduced action potentials. Many of the neurons penetrated responded to noise
bursts and the latencies of any time-locked synaptic potentials were noted. Then,
over a period of 20 min, the HRP was iontophoretically injected into the cell and

64

F. Nottebohm

the ­stereotaxic coordinates of the cell injected were recorded. Then the bird was
killed and the brain prepared for histology. The HRP reached into all corners of the
cells injected, but did not spill out, giving a beautiful, Golgi-like, rendering of soma
and processes, down to the level of synaptic spines. The full anatomy of these cells
was photographed and drawn, as seen in 100 um-thick sections. When these cells
were later cut into thinner sections and the sections were covered with a photographic emulsion, the nuclei of seven of the cells had over them a rich collection of
exposed silver grains. We inferred that, as expected, approximately one in ten of the
HVC neurons that had been randomly penetrated had been born during (or after)
the 2 weeks of 3H-thymidine treatment that had ended 30 days prior to electrode
penetration; four of these seven cells had responded to sound. We now had direct
evidence that at least some of the labeled HVC cells that we had identified as neurons
were, indeed, neurons and that some of these cells had been recruited into existing,
functioning circuits. I believe this experiment turned the tide on how other scientists
felt about adult neurogenesis (Paton and Nottebohm, 1984).
Four years later this result was confirmed using a totally different and much
simpler approach. This time we used a combination of 3H-thymidine as a birth-date
marker and fluorogold as a retrograde tracer. By making injections of flurogold in
Area X or RA in canaries pretreated with 3H-thymidine, we were able to show that
whereas the great majority of HVC neurons that project to Area X (Fig. 2.4) are
born before hatching, those that project to RA (HVC→RA projection neurons) are
born after hatching and during the very period when song is learned as an auditorymotor skill (Alvarez-Buylla et al., 1988a) as well as later in adulthood.
Yet, it seemed wise to remain skeptical. For adult neurogenesis to be an indisputable fact, we had to show where the new cells came from and how they reached
their destination. It is only when all parts of a story fit together, that one is confident
that this is the story that explains all observed facts.

2.13 Birth and Migration of New Neurons
Again, good fortune interceded, this time in the person of Arturo Alvarez-Buylla
(pre-viewed in the above ref.), an extraordinarily able experimentalist whose thesis
work focused on the origin and migration of new neurons in adult avian brain.
We already suspected that, as during embryogeny, the new neurons were born in
ventricular walls (Goldman and Nottebohm, 1983), but we needed stronger evidence
that this was so.
Soon after the initial, 1983, publication, Daniel Buskirk joined my laboratory
and started a search for monoclonal antibodies that might identify cell types or
phenomena involved in the production / recruitment of new neurons into adult
brain. It was the kind of approach that some belittle as a “fishing expedition” and
that, with a bit of luck can generate key clues. Mice were injected intraperitoneally
with a suspension of homogenized adult canary brain. Spleen cells from these

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

65

mice were fused with mouse myeloma cells and plated into tissue culture dishes,
followed by screening for positive hybridomas. We then screened for antibodies
that recognized markers restricted to the telencephalon and associated with the
ventricular zone. Our “expedition” came up with the nicest “fish” we could have
hoped for: a monoclonal antibody, 40E-C, that stained cells with small bodies in
the walls of the lateral ventricle and long, undividing processes that dove into the
forebrain’s parenchyma. Follow up work by Alvarez-Buylla showed that this antibody recognized vimentin. We had stumbled upon radial glia, a cell type familiar
to embryologists but not known to occur in adult birds (Alvarez-Buylla et al., 1987)
or mammals.
But this observation got still better. When the antibody that stained for vimentin
was combined with cresyl violet, we were able to see an uncanny association
between the vimentin-positive radial fibers and small, darkly staining elongated
cells that were closely apposed to these fibers and showed their same orientation
(Fig. 2.6). This kind of cell had not been described before in the parenchyma of
adult telencephalon. We thought these might be young, migrating neurons
(Alvarez-Buylla et  al., 1988b). To test this interpretation, adult male canaries
received two intramuscular injections of 3H-thymidine 12  h apart and were
killed at various intervals thereafter. One day after the last injection there were
no labeled neurons, but lots of labeled cells in the ventricular wall of the lateral
ventricle. By 3 days, still no labeled neurons, but small, elongated, darkly staining
labeled cells were seen a short distance from the ventricular zone. This collection of labeled cells continued to grow and move further away from the lateral

Fig.  2.6  (Figure  2D from Alvarez-Buylla et  al. 1988b). A cresyl violet stain that reveals cell
nuclei and an antibody stain that recognizes vimentin allow us to see the relation between young
migrating neurons (small, elongated nucleus) and the vimentin positive fibers of radial glia in
adult canary forebrain

66

F. Nottebohm

ventricle in successive days. By day 20 it had reached the furthest corners of the
telencephalon and on that day, too, the first labeled, differentiated neurons were
seen. Thereafter, the cohort of small, elongated, darkly staining labeled cells
dwindled and, at the same time the number of labeled neurons steadily increased.
We felt that we now had further evidence that the neurons were born in the
ventricular zone, and from there migrated, as spindle-shaped, young neurons,
guided by radial glia fibers (Fig. 2.6), until they reached, presumably, a signal
that triggered the change from the migratory to the sedentary phenotype. When
we compared the maximum count (at 20  days) of migratory young neurons to
the number of adult, labeled neurons, we inferred that only one third or less of
the cells that migrated away from the ventricular zone were still present, as
neurons, when our counts stopped, 40  days after 3H-thymidine injection. As
during embryogeny, the system overproduced neurons and only a fraction was
incorporated for longer durations of time. We felt that the story of adult neurogenesis had, with these details, been firmed up a bit more (Alvarez-Buylla and
Nottebohm, 1988).

2.14 Neuronal Stem Cells
We had identified the presumptive birth-site. But who were the parents? To
answer this question, adult canaries received a single injection of 3H-thymidine
and were killed 1 h later. Virtually all of the labeled ventricular zone cells were
in the walls of the forebrain’s lateral ventricle. Apparently, cells on the walls of
other ventricles seldom divided in adulthood, as already reported for the adult
mammalian brain (Korr, 1980; Smart, 1961). In other, similarly treated adult
canaries the strip of tissue (ventricular zone, VZ) adjacent to the lateral ventricle
was excised and its cells dissociated and spread on a glass slide, where they
formed a monolayer of easily identified cells. The cells were then reacted with
the anti-vimentin antibody and incubated for autoradiography. At 1 h survivals,
80% of the VZ cells labeled with 3H-thymidine (20 times above background)
were vimentin positive and a good many of these had the long, undividing process
typical of radial glia. Since the highest concentrations of labeled VZ cells of adult
canaries coincided with those regions where the greatest number of migrating
neurons first appeared, we suggested that neurons were probably born there by
division of radial cells (Alvarez-Buylla et al., 1990b). If so, then the very cells
responsible for neurogenesis were the same as the ones that seemed to guide their
migration (Fig  2.6). This arrangement was confirmed some years later in work
that Alvarez-Buylla did after he left my laboratory (Alvarez-Buylla et al., 1998).
Subsequently, Alvarez-Buylla and co-workers showed that the neuronal stem
cells of adult mammalian brain are also glia – radial glia and astrocytes (Doetsch
et  al., 1999; Seri et  al., 2001; Alvarez-Buylla et  al., 2002; Merkle et  al., 2004;

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

67

Alvarez-Buylla and Lim, 2004). Furthermore, work in developing mammalian
brain has also shown that radial glia are progenitors of neurons (Kriegstein and
Alvarez-Buylla, 2009). Time and again I have been gratified by how well our
findings in birds generalized to mammals.

2.15 The Relation Between Behavior, Adult Neurogenesis
and Neuronal Replacement
My initial interest had been the biology of vocal learning. This had led to studies
of adult neurogenesis. But what was the relation between neurogenesis and
behavior? The fact that in canaries HVC neuron numbers did not increase with
age suggested that when new HVC neurons were recruited they replaced –
numerically at least – older ones that died (Nottebohm, 1985). A similar conclusion had been reached by Bayer (1985) in her study of the dynamics of neuronal
recruitment and total ­neuronal numbers in the olfactory bulb of adult rodents.
But what were the behavioral correlates of replacement, if any? For example, did
the incidence of neurogenesis in HVC change seasonally, accompanying changes
in song?
To test this idea, adult canaries received intramuscular injections of 3H-thymidine
every month of the year and were killed 1 month later and the proportion of labeled
neurons in HVC was counted. This proportion showed two yearly peaks, in October
and March. These peaks were preceded 2 months earlier by peaks in the ratio of
pycnotic cells to total number of neurons in HVC, suggesting that we were dealing
with a process of replacement (Kirn et  al., 1994) (Fig.  2.7). Pycnotic staining is
thought to identify dying cells, but of course, by the time a cell is that far gone it is
not possible to know if it had been a neuron.
Two earlier studies had shown that the song of adult male canaries became
particularly unstable during September and February, when many new song syllables were added (Nottebohm et  al., 1986, 1987). These changes in behavior
occurred between the peaks in HVC cell death and the peaks in new neuron
recruitment. The relative magnitude of the changes in behavior (higher in summer
than in winter) bore a close relation to the relative magnitude of the neuronal
recruitment peaks, also higher in late summer than in late winter (Kirn et al., 1994)
(Fig. 2.6).
These results of our 1994 study suggested that song stereotypy was weakened
by the death of neurons in HVC and that the resulting vocal variability allowed
the birds to master new sounds. The subsequent increase in new neuron and total
neuronal numbers occurred as stereotypy was, once more, reinstated. Other observations, described in the next section, suggest how the cellular and behavioral
changes come about.

68

F. Nottebohm

Fig. 2.7  (Figure 3 from Kirn
et al., 1994). Monthly relation between neuronal
recruitment and cell death in
nucleus HVC and appearance
of new song syllables in
1–2 year old male canaries.
(a) Mean (plus or minus
standard error) of 3H-labeled
neurons per 1,000 HVC neurons in birds killed at different times of year 1 month
after 3H-thymidine injection.
(b) Number of pycnotic cells
per 1,000 HVC neurons. For
(a) and (b) the number of
birds in each monthly sample
is indicated above the error
bar and the first letter of each
month indicates when the
birds were killed. (c) Mean
number of new syllable types
that appeared in the song of
six adult male canaries each
month during their second
year of life. The shaded bars
linking (a–c) emphasize timing of the two peaks in neuronal recruitment and their
relation to peaks in cell death
and syllable acquisition

2.16 Use and Disuse as Regulators of New Neuron Survival
Work on neurogenesis emphasizes counts of neurons labeled with a birth-date
marker. For practical reasons, those counts must often wait until the new cells have
reached their destination and acquired an adult neuronal phenotype. By that time it
is not possible to say how many of the new neurons were born and what fraction
survived. The number present at the time of the count is the number “recruited” into
that part of the brain and this number, as we shall see, continues to change.

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

69

The blood testosterone levels of adult canaries fall after midsummer and at that
time the song of these birds becomes more hesitant and variable (Nottebohm et al.,
1987). How do these two changes relate to the new neurons? Testosterone does not
regulate the production of new HVC neurons, but does promote the survival of
those born in adulthood (Rasika et  al., 1994). In this manner daylength, gonadal
function, reproduction, song and neuronal replacement are part of a seasonal
­choreography that recurs every year. Though there is no direct proof for this, it
seems plausible that the song syllables no longer in use and the cells that encode
them are discarded to make room for new cells that can then engage in the mastery
of new song syllables (Kirn et al., 1994). This view is supported by the observation
that a significant fraction of the HVC→RA neurons present in the HVC of adult
male canaries in early spring disappears by early fall, while those present in early
fall are still present in the following spring (Kirn et al., 1991; Kirn and Nottebohm,
1993; Nottebohm et al., 1994).
We wondered to what extent the effect of testosterone on new neuron survival was
mediated directly by its action on androgen sensitive neurons (Arnold et al., 1976),
and how much was mediated indirectly by promoting higher levels of singing.
The two variables were teased apart by looking at the performance of adult male
canaries in early fall, a time when, unlike in the spring, amount of singing is not
driven by testosterone. Two groups were set up: birds in one group had intact testis,
those in the other had been castrated in early September. The rate of singing
between these two groups, tested for 1  month starting 15  days after the date of
castration, did not differ. All birds received 3H-thymidine systemically during postcastration days 10–14. When castrates and intacts that sang comparable amounts
were compared, the number of 3H-labeled HVC neurons was 2.6 times higher in
intact controls than in castrates. However, in castrates with plasma testosterone
levels that were undetectable, the mean amount of singing was positively related to
the number of new neurons. This outcome suggests that singing and gonadal factors
promote, separately, the recruitment of new neurons into HVC circuits and that
when they exert this effect together they do so in an additive manner (Alvarez-Borda
and Nottebohm, 2002).
The next experiment tested directly how singing contributes to new neuron
­survival. New HVC neurons of adult canaries are already in place 8 days after these
cells are born (Kirn et al., 1999); this relatively brief period probably results from
the proximity of their birth site – the floor (ventricular zone) of the lateral ventricle
overlying HVC (Scott and Lois, 2007) – to their final destination. Yet, even after
the cells have made the transition from their migratory to their sedentary stage they
are not yet “safe”. Their survival must be confirmed by “use”. We compared the
number of new HVC neurons in two groups of adult male canaries matched for age.
In one group the birds were able to sing unhindered for the full 38 days that intervened between injection of the birth date marker bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) and
the day they were killed. In the other group, singing was discouraged by a person
that sat in the room where the birds were housed; this person waved a hand at any
bird that started to sing. This protocol was followed during daylight hours from day
31 to day 38 after BrdU treatment. When the birds were killed, the number of new

70

F. Nottebohm

HVC neurons was 63% higher in the birds that sang freely during all 38 days before
they were killed. This effect presumably reflects how pathway use affects new
neuron survival. In that same study we showed that the expression of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in the HVC of adult male canaries allowed to sing was
directly proportional to the number of songs produced per hour. This increased
expression is accompanied by higher concentrations of BDNF in HVC (Li et al.,
2000). An earlier study had shown that BDNF infused into the HVC of adult canaries
promotes the survival of new HVC neurons (Rasika et  al., 1999). Under normal
conditions, both singing and rising testosterone levels up-regulate BDNF expression and thereby promote the survival of new HVC neurons (Rasika et al., 1999;
Alvarez-Borda and Nottebohm, 2002; Alvarez-Borda et al., 2004).

2.17 New Neurons as a Vehicle for Learning
I pointed out earlier that song nuclei HVC and RA (Fig. 2.4) develop late during
ontogeny. In the case of HVC, but not RA, many new neurons continue to be added
during the very weeks and months when juvenile canaries first acquire their song.
As discussed earlier, many of these new neurons are HVC→RA projection neurons
(Alvarez-Buylla et al., 1988a, 1990a, 1992). In zebra finches, too, the neurons that
project from HVC to RA are added at the time song is first learned (Nordeen and
Nordeen, 1988). This is important. It will be remembered that Joseph Altman had
promoted the hypothesis that only inter-neurons were added after birth (the
granule cells of cerebellum, hippocampus and olfactory bulb), but clearly that is not
the case in the song system. Moreover, the very elegant work of Hahnloser et al.
(2002) with zebra finches strongly suggests that the sparse firing of HVC→RA
projection neurons encodes the program for learned song (Long and Fee, 2008).
If so, the memory of learned song may be in the connections formed by the new
cells at the time song is acquired. Taken together, these observations suggest that in
zebra finches and canaries availability of uncommitted cells is important for learning
song as a sensory-motor skill, whether this be in juveniles or, in the case of adult
canaries, seasonally.
Given these correlations, does the recruitment of HVC→RA neurons in adulthood differ between species that, like the zebra finch learn their song only once,
before sexual maturity, and canaries that modify their song every year? The answer
is yes. Many more new neurons are added to the HVC of adult canaries than to that
of zebra finches (Alvarez-Buylla et al., 1990a), which brings us to the next issue.
Zebra finches normally master their learned song before sexual maturity
(Immelmann, 1969), which occurs around post-hatching day 80; most of the pupil’s
modification of vocal output takes place between post-hatching days 45 and 65.
After then and until day 80 or 90 the changes that occur have to do with increased
song stereotypy. New songs presented after day 65 are not imitated (Boehner,
1990). However, new songs presented after day 65 are imitated if the bird had, until
then, been denied access to a live model it could imitate (Eales, 1985).

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

71

2.18 Manipulations of Learning Load Alter
New Neuron Recruitment
The recruitment of HVC→RA neurons in socially reared juvenile zebra finches
allowed to imitate a model drops markedly after post-hatching day 65 and by day
150 is only one-fifth of that on day 65. However, the recruitment rate remains significantly higher in isolates unable to imitate an external model because none is
available (Fig.  2.8). A possible interpretation is that when an expected peak in
memory load, which normally occurs during the sensitive period for song learning,
is delayed, juvenile rates of new neuron recruitment remain high, as if waiting for
this event (Wilbrecht et al., 2006).
We now know that the vocal variability required for song learning depends,
probably, not just on new neurons but also on the “noisy” output from LMAN
(Fig.  2.4) to RA (Kao et  al., 2005; Oelveczky et  al., 2005) and on rising BDNF
levels in nucleus RA (Kittelberger and Mooney, 2004). When that output from
LMAN to RA is blocked, immediate song stereotypy follows (Scharff and
Nottebohm, 1991; Brainard and Doupe, 2001) and no further vocal learning is possible (Bottjer et al., 1984). However, we do not know if and how the events in HVC
affect the role of LMAN in driving output variability. The neurons in HVC that
project to Area X (Fig. 2.4) and that are born before hatching (Alvarez-Buylla et al.,
1988a,b) may hold the clue for integrating events in HVC and LMAN, but I will
not enter into those details here (Mooney, 2009).
The HVC→RA→nXIIts descending pathway (Fig. 2.4) of the male zebra finch
song system is much the same and predominantly uncrossed on each side of the
brain and both sides play an important role in the production of learned song
(Williams et al., 1992). The number of 30-day-old HVC→RA neurons counted in

Fig. 2.8  (Figure 1b from Wilbrecht et al., 2006). An excess of new neurons is added to nucleus
HVC after post-hatching day 65 and until post-hatching day 150, a time when isolates, but not
socially reared controls, can still imitate new songs

72

F. Nottebohm

90-day-old zebra finches was the same in birds that had learned their song by imitation
as in birds that had been prevented from learning by early deafening or bilateral
lesion of nucleus LMAN (Wilbrecht et al., 2002a,b). One might be tempted to
conclude, from this, that the recruitment of new HVC→RA neurons at that age is
not affected by learning, but two other sets of data suggest this would be the wrong
conclusion. One set we have already discussed: recruitment of these cells remains
higher in isolates that were not able to imitate an external model. The other set has
to do with a nerve-cutting experiment. As discussed earlier, the syrinx of songbirds
has right and left independent sound sources. If the right or left syringeal half of
male zebra finches is denervated before the onset of song learning, then that side of
the syrinx and the higher pathways that innervate it are not able play a major role
in song imitation. Nonetheless, these birds are able to produce close copies of a
model song. In them, the HVC on the intact side must assume a disproportionately
important role in the acquisition and production of learned song. The number of
30-day-old neurons counted in the HVC of the intact side at 90 days of age was in
these birds 60% higher that on the denervated side, whose numbers were the
same as in intact controls. Presumably during song learning the intact side
acquired most of the skill normally shared by the two sides (Wilbrecht et al., 2002a).
This difference was eliminated if unilateral nerve section was accompanied by
deafening or by bilateral lesions of LMAN. Apparently the act of song learning
by reference to an external model only affected the recruitment of neurons involved
with song learning. Thus, while there is a developmental program that arrives at a
“normal count” of neurons in adult HVC regardless of experience (see also Burek
et  al., 1991), an extra learning load (Wilbrecht et  al., 2002a) or the delay of an
expected learning load (Wilbrecht et al., 2006) can alter this count during the time
song would be normally mastered.
If the above results, taken together, seem a bit confusing, this is probably
because we are not yet very advanced in how we think about what HVC does.
This point is emphasized by the next experiment. Male zebra finches reared and
housed socially until 4–5  months of age were given systemic injections of
3H-thymidine. Two hours after the last injection individual birds were moved into
a larger aviary that they shared either with just a female or with 20 other pairs of
adult zebra finches. The injected birds were killed 40 days after this change in
social setting and the number of 3H-labeled neurons in HVC was counted. To our
surprise, the birds housed with the larger group had 2.5 more labeled neurons
than those housed just with a mate (Lipkind et  al., 2002). Since the change in
social setting occurred well after the end of the sensitive period for new song
learning we are left to wonder why the difference in social setting affected new
neuron survival. Not only is this a reminder of how poorly we understand the
behavior we study, but also a reminder of the importance of including in our
­studies natural variables, such as the complexity of the social group in which an
animal lives. Moreover, it is important to remember that much as HVC plays a
key role in the production of learned song (encoding), it may also be involved in
song perception (decoding), as suggested by the “motor theory for song perception in birds” (Williams and Nottebohm, 1985).

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

73

2.19 Evidence from Other Songbird Systems
Most of our work on adult neurogenesis and neuronal replacement focused on
song learning because an understanding of how vocal learning came about
­continued to be a central concern for my laboratory. However, I was worried that
laboratory work on just one system might be misleading and therefore I wanted to
extend it to other systems, other species, and particularly to animals living in the
wild. The latter goal was met by a study of neuronal recruitment and turnover in
the hippocampus of free-ranging chickadees, Parus atricapillus. This study
showed that large neurons continued to be added in adulthood to the hippocampus
of these forest songbirds, particularly at times of year (later summer, early fall)
when chickadees cached many food items that they later had to retrieve. Recruitment
of these cells was twice as high in free-ranging individuals as in others caught in
the wild and then housed in a large outdoors aviary (Fig. 2.9). Unlike reports in the
hippocampus of laboratory bred and laboratory housed rodents, the new cells
recruited into the chickadee hippocampus lived only for a few weeks or months
(Fig. 2.10). Perhaps after then, the spatial information held by those cells was no
longer relevant to the animal’s needs (Barnea and Nottebohm, 1994, 1996).

Fig. 2.9  (Figure 6 from Barnea and Nottebohm, 1994). Mean (plus or minus standard error of the
mean) percentage of 3H-labeled hippocampal complex (HC) neurons in adult wild-caught chickadees. Six of these birds had been living in the wild until killed in November (filled circles); four
had been housed in a large outdoor aviary during the 3 months before they were killed, also in
November (open circles). Each of the 10 birds received a single dose of 50 uCi of 3H-thymidine
and was killed 6  weeks later. Two trends are shown in this figure: (1) a higher percentage of
3H-labeled HC neurons was present rostrally than caudally in the free-ranging birds, a twofold
difference; (2) the percentage of new HC neurons was twofold higher in the free-ranging than in
the captive birds. Differences between groups were not significant (NS) or reached significance
levels of P < 0.01 (*), P < 0.001 (**), or P < 0.0001 (***)

74

F. Nottebohm

Fig. 2.10  (Figure 5 from Barnea and Nottebohm, 1994). Survival curves of 3H-labeled neurons
in the rostral, middle and caudal HV of free-ranging chickadees treated with a single dose of
3H-thymidine at different times of year and then killed 6–52 weeks later. Many fewer new neurons
are present after the 6-week survival

Fig. 2.11  (Figure 3 from Barnea et al., 2006). Mean (plus or minus SD) number of 3H-labeled
neurons per mm3 in the caudal nidopallium (NC) of adult zebra finches that received systemic
injection of 3H-thymidine and were then housed singly or communally in large outdoors aviaries
(* indicates P = or < than 0.05). Birds were killed 40, 60 or 150 days after the change in social
setting. Differences present at 40 days disappear at longer survivals

Another study focused on how changes in the social conditions under which
adult zebra finches were housed affected the survival of neurons born immediately
before the social change. This approach had already yielded evidence that social
setting affected the survival of new neurons in HVC, which I mentioned at the end
of the previous section. In a follow up, we looked at a part of the caudal forebrain,
the nidopallium caudale, NC, thought to integrate auditory and non-auditory sensory information. A change to a more complex social environment – sharing an
outdoor aviary with many zebra finches vs. sharing it with no other birds had a
marked effect on up-regulating NC neuronal recruitment. As in the case of the
chickadees, the increased recruitment was followed by the eventual demise of most
cells so that by 150 days only a small fraction of the originally recruited cohort still
remained (Fig.  2.11). It was of interest, too, that survival of the new neurons
depended on part of the brain sampled, e.g. more rostral or more caudal, as if in
some parts of the brain memories were up-dated more frequently than in others
(assuming memory storage in these cells!) (Barnea et al., 2006).

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

75

Fig. 2.12  (Figure 5 from Adar et al., 2008). Mean density of BrdU-labeled neurons per mm3 in
five sections of nidopallium of adult male zebra finches. BrdU was administered systemically at
4 months of age and birds were moved to a novel social setting either 30 or 90 days after the last
injection of BrdU. The new social setting consisted of being housed with a female the male had
not encountered before or 40 other zebra finches of both sexes the bird had not encountered
before. Birds in either of these two settings occupied outdoors aviaries of the same size. All birds
were killed 40  days after entering the new social setting. In the four groups shown here open
symbols correspond to birds that encountered social change 1 month after the last BrdU injection;
filled symbols, birds that encountered social change 90 days after BrdU injection. Triangles, complex
social setting; squares, housed as pairs. Group sizes were six or seven birds. The most rostral section
is 1, the most caudal, 5

A further study of the NC of adult zebra finches (Adar et al., 2008) showed
that position and age of “new” neurons at the time of a social change as well as
the nature of the social change influenced the survival of the new cells. A complex
social setting favored the survival of caudal 1-month old neurons; a simple
social setting favored the survival of rostral, 3-months old neurons. Perhaps the
rostrally placed, older cells were too set in their ways to cope with a surge in information load, a situation that, however, encouraged the survival of younger, caudal
neurons (Fig. 2.12). Apparently a same stimulus can prolong the survival of some
cells and doom others. Studies that focus on a single cohort of same age cells,
obtained from a single anatomical location may miss the rather complex strategies
a brain might use to manage its replaceable neurons. A replaceable neuron vested
with information may be a humbug or a precious asset, depending on past and
present memory loads.

2.20 Overview
The song system is likely to yield the first description of how the vertebrate brain
acquires a complex learned behavior and the role of late born neurons in this
process.
I reviewed how my laboratory discovered evidence of widespread neuronal
recruitment in adult avian brain. That evidence was scrutinized and challenged
and held suspect until reliability of the birth dating process, reliability of neuronal

76

F. Nottebohm

identification, evidence of function, and origin of the new cells and manner of
migration were established. When these matters were resolved, one big question
remained: Why new neurons?
Joseph Altman suggested a hypothesis: experience gleaned post-natally sculpted
the fine wiring of circuits handling that information. He saw this role vested in the
late born granule cells of mammalian cerebellum, hippocampus and olfactory bulb.
We have found that in songbirds the new neurons added to the forebrain of juveniles
and adults have a much wider distribution than in mammals and are not confined to
granule cells or inter-neurons. Our best-studied example, the HVC→RA neurons,
are projection neurons. As in Altman’s hypothesis, however, they are involved with
a late-developing function, song learning.
If late-born neurons are required for the mastery of late-developing skills, then
we might predict that some of the neurons required for vocal learning in humans
would also develop late, as language is acquired, and that new waves of these neurons
would be recruited when new languages are learned and perhaps this would also
apply to manual skills, to the mastery of music and to some sports. Clearly, there is
need for much more comparative data. But even if there is a correlation between
late developing skills and post-natally born neurons, there was no prediction that
neuronal replacement would be encountered in the juvenile and adult brain or
that there would be specific types of cells that belonged to the replaceable category.
As we became aware of replaceable neurons, many new questions came to mind:
what was special about these cells, about their functions, about the information they
held and the way they held it? Did these cells age in a particularly fast way, were
they susceptible to death by over-use? Moreover, why was adult neurogenesis so
much more common in birds that in mammals?
During my formative years I had been taught that neural plasticity had to do
with the nature of connections between existing neurons. Information was stored
in the synapses and could be altered by changing the number and efficacy of synapses between cells that were already in place. Since these changes could, in
­principle, happen again and again, the adult brain had virtually unlimited space for
all its learning needs, which could be satisfied by neurons already in place.
Neuroscientists had not, by the mid 1980s, predicted the existence of ephemeral
neurons, of cells born in adulthood, in captive or free ranging animals, that would
be recruited for a few weeks or months or a year and would then disappear and be
replaced by others.
Why, then does the healthy brain replace some of its neurons? Might it be that
in some systems the whole neuron, rather than each synapse, is the unit of learning?
Might it be that the very susceptibility of synapses to change makes them unreliable
repositories for memory? Might long-lasting changes in gene expression be
required to lock up irreversibly a cell’s functional modifications associated with
learning thus securing for long periods a particular memory? If so, might this come
at the expense of that cell participating in new learning events?
The need to replace neurons could result, too, from age restrictions on what a
neuron can do. Young neurons may be able to sculpt their connections in ways
that older neurons cannot, regardless of participation in earlier learning events.

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

77

An overproduction of new neurons with modifiable connections may provide many
alternatives from which to choose by use and disuse, with only a fraction of the
new cells persisting for longer periods of time. Restriction by age and restriction by
learning could be complementary processes and the consequence would still be that
new neurons have a learning flexibility that older neurons lack. Learned song, the
circuits that support it and the cells within these circuits that continue to be added
offer good material to test the role of new neurons and the manner in which this role
is achieved.
If neurons, rather than synapses are the units of long-term memory, new principles of brain economics emerge. Synapses are too numerous to count, but neuron
numbers are finite. Assigning memory space to skills mastered may deny “space”
to memories still to be acquired. May be neuronal replacement clears the brain of
idle cells or of unwanted memories and of the cells that hold them, and makes room
for new cells and the new memories they may store. The 10-year life span of a
songbird is five times longer than that of a mouse yet the brain of a canary and that
of a mouse weigh approximately the same, one gram. Neuronal replacement may
be much more common in birds than in mammals because the brain of the former
must be able to learn many more things over a longer span of time.
But even as I offer the above speculations, I should warn that the link between
song learning and the recruitment of new HVC→RA neurons remains to be tested
and until then should remain suspect. Recent, unpublished observations by Clare
Walton, a doctoral student in my laboratory, show that the number of HVC→RA
neurons in adult male zebra finches doubles during the first 2 years after song is
mastered, though the song itself changes relatively little after sexual maturity. Do
the new neurons partake in song production? Do they learn this role? We do not
know. It is not inconceivable that neurogenesis in juvenile and adult brain has little
or nothing to do with learning, but is related to other, still unimagined needs.
The account I have offered is almost painfully rustic in the extent to which it
leaves out the myriads of questions that come to mind about the molecular biology
of adult neurogenesis and neuronal replacement. Some of these questions occurred
to me too and I would have liked to address them, if funding had been available.
However, it is probably just as well that I did not, for I now realize that this will be
the work of another life time. Lucky those that will carry on with these studies.
The discovery of adult neurogenesis, of its mechanisms and of its use in neuronal replacement offer, potentially, a whole new approach to brain rejuvenation
and brain repair. Knowing that young neurons can be added to old brains and that
in some systems can replace, numerically, other neurons that have died should
allow a new approach to the study of brain aging. As molecular ways to control the
production, migration, differentiation, connections and survival of new neurons
become available, it is unthinkable that the clinical potential of replaceable neurons
will go unexplored. A quarter century after the 1984 Hope for a New Neurology
conference in New York, I am confident that the adult brain’s potential to produce
and replace neurons will eventually be harnessed for clinical purposes. But that is
not why I did this work. I did it because I fell in love with the song of birds and
wanted to understand how vocal learning came to be.

78

F. Nottebohm

References
Adar, E., Nottebohm, F., Barnea, A. 2008. The relationship between nature of social change, age
and position of new neurons and their survival in adult zebra finch brain. J. Neurosci.
28:5394–5400.
Agate, R.J., Grisham, W., Wade, J., Mann, S., Wingfield, J., Schanen, C., Palotie, A., Arnold, A.P.
2003. A neural, not gonadal, origin of brain sex differences in a gynandromorphic finch. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100:4873–4878.
Agate, R.J., Choe, M., Arnold, A.P. 2004. Sex differences in structure and expression of the sex
chromosome genes CHD1Z and CHD1W in zebra finches. Mol. Biol. Evol. 21:384–396.
Airey, D.C., Kroodsma, D.E., DeVoogd, T.J. 2000. Differences in the complexity of song tutoring
cause differences in the amount learned and in dendritic spine density in a songbird telencephalic song control nucleus. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 73:274–281.
Altman, J. 1962. Are new neurons formed in the brains of adult mammals? Science
135:1127–1128.
Altman, J. 1963. Autoradiographic investigation of cell proliferation in the brains of rats and cats.
Anat. Rec. 145:573–591.
Altman, J. 1967. Postnatal growth and differentiation of the mammalian brain, with implications for
a morphological theory of memory. In “The Neurosciences, a Study Program”, G.C. Quarton, T.
Melnechuck, F.O. Schmidt, eds., pp. 723–743. The Rockefeller University Press, New York.
Altman, J. 1969. DNA metabolism and cell proliferation. In “Structural Neurochemistry”, A. Lajtha,
ed. Plenum Press, New York/London, Handbook of Neurochemistry, vol II, pp. 137–182.
Altman, J. 1970. Postnatal neurogenesis and the problem of neural plasticity. In “Developmental
Neurobiology”, pp.197–237.
Altman, J., Bulut, F.G. 1976. Organic maturation and the development of learning capacity.
In “Neural Mechanisms of Learning and Memory”, M.R. Rosenzweig, E.L. Bennett, eds.,
pp. 236–240. MIT Press.
Altman, J., Das, G.D. 1965. Autoradiographic and histological evidence of postnatal hippocampal
neurogenesis in rats. J Comp Neurol 124:319–335.
Alvarez-Borda, B., Nottebohm, F. 2002 Gonads and singing play separate, additive roles in new
neuron recruitment in adult canary brain. J. Neurosci. 22:8684–8690.
Alvarez-Borda, B., Haripal, B., Nottebohm, F. 2004. Timing of brain-derived neurotrophic factor
exposure affects life expectancy of new neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101:3957–3961.
Alvarez-Buylla, A., Lim, D.A. 2004. For the long run: maintaining germinal niches in the adult
brain. Neuron 41:683–686.
Alvarez-Buylla, A., Nottebohm, F. 1988. Migration of young neurons in adult avian brain. Nature
335:353–354.
Alvarez-Buylla, A., Buskirk, D.R., Nottebohm, F. 1987. Monoclonal antibody reveals radial glia
in adult avian brain. J. Comp. Neurol. 264:159–170.
Alvarez-Buylla, A., Theelen, M., Nottebohm, F. 1988a. Birth of projection neurons in the higher
vocal center of the canary forebrain before, during and after song learning. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 85:8722–8726.
Alvarez-Buylla, A., Theelen, M., Nottebohm, F. 1988b. Mapping of radial glia and of a new cell
type in adult canary brain. J. Neurosci. 8:2707–2712.
Alvarez-Buylla, A., Kirn, J.R., Nottebohm, F. 1990a. Birth of projection neurons in adult avian
brain may be related to perceptual or motor learning. Science 249:1444–1446.
Alvarez-Buylla, A., Theelen, M., Nottebohm, F. 1990b. Proliferation “hot spots” in adult avian
ventricular zone reveal radial cell division. Neuron 5:101–109.
Alvarez-Buylla, A., Ling, C-Y., Nottebohm, F. 1992. High vocal center growth and its relation to neurogenesis, neuronal replacement and song acquisition in juvenile canaries. J. Neurobiol. 23:396–406.
Alvarez-Buylla, A., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., Mateo, A.S., Merchant-Larios, H. 1998. Primary
neural precursors and intermitotic nuclear migration in the ventricular zone of adult canaries.
J. Neurosci. 18:1020–1037.

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

79

Alvarez-Buylla, A., Seri, B., Doetsch, F. 2002. Identification of neural stem cells in the adult
vertebrate brain. Brain Res. Bull. 57:751–758.
Andalman, A.S., Fee, M.S. 2009. A basal ganglia-forebrain circuit in the songbird biases motor
output to avoid vocal errors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106:12518–12523.
Anderson, M.J., Waxman, S.G. 1985. Neurogenesis in adult vertebrate spinal cord in situ and
in vitro: a new model system. In “Hope for a New Neurology”, F. Nottebohm, ed., Ann. N.Y.
Acad. Sci., vol 457, pp. 213–233.
Angevine, J.B. 1965. Time of neuron origin in the hippocampal region. An autoradiographic study
in the mouse. Exp. Neurol. Suppl. 2:1–70.
Arnold, A.P., Nottebohm, F., Pfaff, D.W. 1976. Hormone concentrating cells in vocal control and
other areas of the brain of the zebra finch. J. Comp. Neurol. 165:487–512.
Aronov, D., Andalman, A.S., Fee, M.S. 2008. A specialized forebrain circuit for vocal babbling
in the juvenile songbird. Science 320:630–634.
Barnea, A., Nottebohm, F. 1994. Seasonal recruitment of new neurons in the hippocampus of
adult, free-ranging black-capped chickadees. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91:11217–11221.
Barnea, A., Nottebohm, F. 1996. Recruitment and replacement of hippocampal neurons in young
and adult chickadees: an addition to the theory of hippocampal learning. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 93:714–718.
Barnea, A., Mishal, A., Nottebohm, F. 2006. Social and spatial changes induce multiple survival
regimes for new neurons in two regions of the adult brain: an anatomical representation of
time? Behav. Brain Res. 167:63–74.
Bayer, S.A. 1985. Neuron production in the hippocampus and olfactory bulb of the adult rat brain:
addition or replacement? In “Hope for a New Neurology”, F. Nottebohm, ed., Ann. N.Y. Acad.
Sci., vol 457, pp. 163–172.
Bayer, S.A., Yackel, J.W., Puri, P.S. 1982. Neurons in the rat dentate gyrus granular layer substantially increase during juvenile and adult life. Science 216:890–892.
Birse, S.C., Leonard, R.B., Coggeshall, R.E. 1980. Neuronal increase in various areas of the
nervous system of the guppy, Lebistes. J. Comp. Neurol. 194:291–301.
Boehner, J. 1990. Early acquisition of song in the zebra finch, Taeniopygia guttata. Anim. Behav.
39:369–374.
Bottjer, S.W., Miesner, E.A., Arnold, A.P. 1984. Forebrain lesions disrupt development but not
maintenance of song in passerine birds. Science 224:901–903.
Bottjer, S.W., Halsema, K.A., Brown, S.A., Miesner, E.A. 1989. Axonal connections of a forebrain nucleus involved with vocal learning in zebra finches. J. Comp. Neurol. 279:312–326.
Brainard, M.S., Doupe, A.J. 2000. Interruption of a basal ganglia-forebrain circuit prevents plasticity of learned vocalizations. Nature 404:762–766.
Brainard, M.S., Doupe, A.J. 2001. Postlearning consolidation of birdsong: stabilizing effects of
age and anterior forebrain lesions. J. Neurosci. 21:2501–2517.
Breunig, J.J et al. 2007. Everything that glitters isn’t gold: a critical review of postnatal neural
precursor analyses. Stem Cell Res. 1:612–627.
Bryans, W.A. 1959. Mitotic activity in the brain of the adult rat. Anat. Rec. 133:65–71.
Bullock, T.H. 1961. The origins of patterned nervous discharge. Behaviour 17:48–59.
Burd, G.D., Nottebohm, F. 1985. Ultrastructural characterization of synaptic terminals formed on
newly generated neurons in a song control nucleus of the adult canary forebrain. J. Comp.
Neurol. 240:143–152.
Burek, M.J., Nordeen, K.W., Nordeen, E.J. 1991. Neuron loss and addition in developing zebra
finch song nuclei are independent of auditory experience during song learning. J. Neurobiol.
22:215–223.
Cajal, S.R. 1894. The Croonian Lecture. La fine structure des centres nerveux. Proc. R. soc. Lond. B
55:444–467.
Cajal, S.R. 1911. Histologie du Systeme Nerveux, vol. 2, pp. 80–119. Maloire, Paris.
Canady, R.A., Kroodsma, D.E., Nottebohm, F. 1984. Population differences in complexity of a
learned skill are correlated with brain space involved. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
81:6232–6234.

80

F. Nottebohm

Canady R.A., Burd, G.B., DeVoogd, T.J., Nottebohm, F. 1988. Effect of testosterone on input
received by an identified neuron type of the canary song system: a Golgi/EM/Degeneration
study. J. Neurosci. 8:3770–3784.
Cardin, J.A., Schmidt, M.F. 2004. Auditory responses in multiple sensorimotor song system
nuclei are co-modulated by behavioral state. J. Neurophysiol. 91:2148–2163.
Dave, A.S., Yu, A.C., Margoliash, D. 1998. Behavioral state modulation of auditory activity in a
vocal motor system. Science 282:2250–2254.
Dayer, A.G., Cleaver K.M., Abouantoun, T., Cameron, H.A. 2005. New GABAergic interneurons
in the adult neocortex and striatum are generated from different precursors. J. Cell Biol.
168:415–427.
DeVoogd, T.J., Nottebohm, F. 1981. Gonadal hormones induce dendritic growth in the adult brain.
Science 214:202–204.
DeVoogd, T.J., Nixdorf, B., Nottebohm, F. 1985. Synaptogenesis and changes in synaptic
­morphology related to acquisition of a new behavior. Brain Res. 329:304–308.
DeVoogd, T.J., Pyskaty, D.J., Nottebohm, F. 1991. Lateral asymmetries and testosterone-induced
changes in the gross morphology of the hypoglossal nucleus in adult canaries. J. Comp.
Neurol. 307:65–76.
DeVoogd, T.J., Krebs, J.R., Healy, S.D., Purvis, A. 1993. Relations between song repertoire size
and the volume of brain nuclei related to song: comparative evolutionary analyses amongst
oscine birds. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 254:75–82.
Doetsch, F., Caille, I., Lim, D.A., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., Alvarez-Buylla, A. 1999. Subventricular
zone astrocytes are neural stem cells in the adult mammalian brain. Cell 97:703–716.
Eales, L.A. 1985. Song learning in zebra finches: some effects of song model availability on what
is learnt and when. Anim. Behav. 33:1293–1300.
Easter, S.S., Jr. 1983. Postnatal neurogenesis and changing connections. Trends Neurosci. 6:53–56.
Goldman, S.A., Nottebohm, F. 1983. Neuronal production, migration and differentiation in a
vocal control nucleus of the adult female canary brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 80:
2390–2394.
Gould, E., Reeves, A.J., Graziano M.S.A., Gross, C.G. 1999. Neurogenesis in the neocortex of
adult primates. Science 286:548–552.
Graziadei, P.P.C., DeHan, R.S. 1973. Neuronal regeneration in frog olfactory system. J. Cell Biol.
59:525–530.
Graziadei, P.P.C., Monti Graziadei, G.A. 1978. Continuous cell renewal in the olfactory system.
In “Handbook of Sensory Physiology”, M. Jacobson, ed., vol IX, pp. 55–83. Springer Verlag,
Berlin.
Graziadei, P.P.C., Monti Graziadei, G.A. 1985. Neurogenesis and plasticity of the olfactory
sensory neurons. In “Hope for a New Neurology”, F. Nottebohm, ed., Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.,
vol 457, pp. 143–161.
Gurney, M.E. 1981. Hormonal control of cell form and number in the zebra finch song system.
J. Neurosci. 1:658–673.
Gurney, M.E., Konishi, M. 1980. Hormone induced sexual differentiation of brain and behavior in
zebra finches. Science 208:1380–1383.
Hahnloser, R.H., Kozhevnikov, A.A., Fee, M.S. 2002. An ultra-sparse code underlies the generation of neural sequences in a songbird. Nature 419:65–70.
Hebb, D.O. 1949. The organization of behavior. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Huber, F. 1960. Untersuchungen ueber die Funktion des Zentralnervensystems und insbesondere
des Gehirns bei der Fortbewegung und der Lauterzeugung der Grillen. Z. vergl. Physiol.
44:60–132.
Immelmann, K. 1969. Song development in the zebra finch and other estrildid finches. In “Bird
Vocalizations”, R.A. Hinde, ed., pp. 61–74. Cambridge Univ. Press, London & New York.
Janata, P., Margoliash, D. 1999. Gradual emergence of song selectivity in sensorimotor structures
of the male zebra finch song system. J. Neurosci. 19:5108–5118.

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

81

Johns, P.R. 1982. Formation of photoreceptors in larval and adult goldfish. J. Neurosci.
2:178–198.
Kandel, E.R. 2006. In search of memory. W.W. Norton & Co., New York and London.
Kao, M.H., Doupe, A.J., Brainard, M.S. 2005. Contributions of an avian basal ganglia-forebrain
circuit to real-time modulation of song. Nature 433:638–643.
Kaplan, M.S. 1985. Formation and turnover of neurons in young and senescent animals: an electron
microscopic and morphometric analysis. In “Hope for a New Neurology”, F. Nottebohm, ed.,
Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., vol 457, pp. 173–192.
Kaplan, M.S., Hinds, J.W. 1977. Neurogenesis in the adult rat: electron microscopic analysis of
light autoradiographs. Science 197:1092–1094.
Karten, H.J., Hodos, W. 1967. A stereotaxic atlas of the brain of the pigeon (Columba livia).
The Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore.
Katz, L.C., Gurney, M.E. 1981. Auditory responses in the zebra finch’s motor system for song.
Brain Res. 221:192–197.
Kirn, J.R., Nottebohm, F. 1993. Direct evidence for loss and replacement of projection neurons in
adult canary brain. J. Neurosci. 13:1654–1663.
Kirn, J.R., Alvarez-Buylla, A., Nottebohm, F. 1991. Production and survival of projection neurons
in the forebrain vocal center of adult male canaries. J. Neurosci. 11:1756–1762.
Kirn, J., O’Loughlin, B., Kasparian, S., Nottebohm, F. 1994. Cell death and neuronal recruitment
in the high vocal center of adult male canaries are temporally related to changes in song. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91:7844–7848.
Kirn, J.R., Fishman, K., Sasportas, A., Alvarez-Buylla, F., Nottebohm, F. 1999. Fate of new neurons
in adult canary high vocal center during the first 30 days after their formation. J. Comp.
Neurol. 411:487–494.
Kittelberger, J.M., Mooney, R. 2004. Acute injections of brain-derived neurotrophic factor in a
vocal premotor nucleus reversibly disrupt adult birdsong stability and trigger syllable deletion.
J. Neurobiol. 62:406–424.
Koketsu, D., Mikami, A., Miyamoto, Y., Hisatsune, T. 2003. Nonrenewal of neurons in the cerebral
neocortex of adult macaque monkeys. J. Neurosci. 23:937–942.
Konishi, M. 1963. The role of auditory feedback in the vocal behavior of the domestic fowl.
Z. Tierpsychol. 20:349–367.
Konishi, M. 1965. The role of auditory feedback in the control of vocalization in the whitecrowned sparrow. Z. Tierpsychol. 22:770–783.
Konorski, J. 1948. Conditioned reflexes and neuron organization. Cambridge Univ. Press, London.
Kornack, D.R., Rakic, P. 2001. Cell proliferation without neurogenesis in adult primate neocortex.
Science 294:2127–2130.
Korr, H. 1980. Proliferation of different cell types in the brain. Adv. Anat. Embryol. Cell Biol.
61:1–69.
Kriegstein, A., Alvarez-Buylla, A. 2009. The glial nature of embryonic and adult neural stem
cells. Ann. Rev. Neurosci. 32:149–184.
Lahousse, E. 1888. Recherches sur l’ontogenese du cervelet. Arch. de Biol. 8:43–110.
Lashley, K.S. 1950. In search of the engram. In “Physiological Mechanisms in Animal Behavior”.
Symposia Soc. Exp. Biol., vol IV, Cambridge Univ. Press, pp. 454–482.
Leonard, R.B., Goggeshall, R.E., Willis, W.D. 1978. A documentation of an age related increase
in neuronal and axonal numbers in the stingray. J. Comp. Neurol. 179:13–22.
Li, X-C., Jarvis, E.D., Alvarez-Borda, B., Lim, D.A., Nottebohm, F. 2000. A relationship between
behavior, neurotrophin expression and new neuron survival. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
97:8584–8589.
Lipkind, D., Nottebohm, F., Rado, R., Barnea, A. 2002. Social change affects the survival of new
neurons in the forebrain of adult songbirds. Behav. Brain Res. 133:31–43.
Long, M.A., Fee, M.S. 2008. Using temperature to analyse temporal dynamics in the songbird
motor pathway. Nature 456:189–194.

82

F. Nottebohm

Magavi, S.S., Leavitt, B.R., Macklis, J.D. 2000. Induction of neurogenesis in the neocortex of
adult mice. Nature 405:951–955.
Margoliash, D. 1986. Preference for autogenous song by auditory neurons in a song system
nucleus of the white-crowned sparrow. J. Neurosci. 6:1643–1661.
Marler, P. 1970a. A comparative approach to vocal learning: song learning in white-crowned sparrows. J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 71 (monogr.):1–25.
Marler, P. 1970b. Birdsong and speech development: could there be parallels? Am. Sci. 58:669–673.
Marler, P., Tamura, M. 1964. Culturally transmitted patterns of vocal behavior in sparrows.
Science 146:1483–1486.
Marler, P., Waser, M.S. 1977. The role of auditory feedback in canary song development. J. Comp.
Physiol. Psychol. 91:8–16.
Merkle, F.T., Tramontin, A.D., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., Alvarez-Buylla, A. 2004. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 101:17528–17532.
Messier, B., Leblond, C.P., Smart, I. 1958. Presence of DNA synthesis and mitosis in the brain of
young adult mice. Exptl. Cell. Res. 14:224–226.
Miale, I.L., Sidman, R.L. 1961. An autoradiograpic analysis of histogenesis in the mouse cerebellum. Exp. Neurol. 4:277–296.
Mooney, R. 2009. Neural mechanisms for learned birdsong. Learn. Mem. 16:655–669.
Mundinger, P. 1970. Vocal imitation and individual recognition of finch calls. Science
168:480–482.
Nordeen, E.J., Nordeen, K.W. 1988. Sex and regional differences in the incorporation of neurons
born during song learning in zebra finches. J. Neurosci. 8:2869–2874.
Nottebohm, F. 1971. Neural lateralization of vocal control in a passerine bird. I. Song. J. Exp.
Zool. 177:229–261.
Nottebohm, F. 1972a. The origins of vocal learning. Am. Nat. 106:116–140.
Nottebohm, F. 1972b. Neural lateralization of vocal control in a passerine bird. II. Subsong, calls
and a theory of vocal learning. J. Exp. Zool. 179:35–49.
Nottebohm, F. 1980a. Testosterone triggers growth of brain vocal control nuclei in adult female
canaries. Brain Res. 189:429–436.
Nottebohm, F. 1980b. Brain pathways for vocal learning in birds: a review of the first 10 years.
In “Progress in Psychobiology and Physiological Psychology”, J.M.S. Sprage, A.N.E. Epstein,
eds., vol. 9, pp. 85–124. Academic Press, New York.
Nottebohm, F. 1981. A brain for all seasons: cyclical anatomical changes in song control nuclei
of the canary brain. Science 214:1368–1370.
Nottebohm, F. 1984. Birdsong as a model in which to study brain processes related to learning.
Condor 86:227–236.
Nottebohm, F. 1985. Neuronal replacement in adulthood. In “Hope for a New Neurology”,
F. Nottebohm, ed., Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., vol 457, pp. 143–161.
Nottebohm, F. 1989. From birdsong to neurogenesis. Sci. Am. 260:74–79.
Nottebohm, F. 1993. The search for neural mechanisms that define the sensitive period for song
learning in birds. Netherlands J. Zoology.
Nottebohm, F., Arnold, A.P. 1976. Sexual dimorphism in vocal control areas of the songbird brain,
Science 194:211–213.
Nottebohm, F., Nottebohm, M.E. 1971. Vocalizations of breeding behavior of surgically deafened
ring doves, Streptopelia risoria. Anim. Behav. 19:313–327.
Nottebohm, F., Nottebohm, M.E. 1978. Relationship between song repertoire and age in the
canary, Serinus canarius. Z. Tierpsychol. 46:298–305.
Nottebohm, F., Stokes, T.M., Leonard, C.M. 1976. Central control of song in the canary, Serinus
canarius. J. Comp. Neurol. 165:457–486.
Nottebohm, F., Kasparian, S., Pandazis, C. 1981. Brain space for a learned task. Brain Res.
213:99–109.
Nottebohm, F., Kelley, D.B., Paton, J.A. 1982. Connections of vocal control nuclei in the canary
telencephalon. J. Comp. Neurol. 207:344–357.

2  Song Learning in Birds Offers a Model for Neuronal Replacement in Adult Brain

83

Nottebohm, F., Nottebohm, M.E., Crane, L.A. 1986. Developmental and seasonal changes in
canary song and their relation to changes in the anatomy of song-control nuclei. Behav. Neural.
Biol. 46:445–471.
Nottebohm, F., Nottebohm, M.E., Crane, L.A., Wingfield, J.C. 1987. Seasonal changes in gonadal
hormone levels of adult male canaries and their relation to song. Behav. Neural. Biol.
47:197–211.
Nottebohm, F. 1993. The search for neural mechanisms that define the sensitive period for song
learning in birds. Netherlands J. Zoology.
Nottebohm, F., O’Loughlin, B., Gould, K., Yohay, C., Alvarez-Buylla, A. 1994. The life span of
new neurons in a song control nucleus of the canary brain depends on time of year when these
cells are born. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91:7849–7853.
Oelveczky, B.P., Andalman, A.S., Fee, M.S. 2005. Vocal experimentation in the juvenile songbird
requires a basal ganglia circuit. PLoS Biol. 3:902–908, e153.
Okuhata, S., Saito, N. 1987. Synaptic connections of thalamo-cerebral vocal nuclei of the canary.
Brain Res. Bull. 18:35–44.
Paton, J.A., Nottebohm, F. 1984. Neurons generated in the adult brain are recruited into functional
circuits. Science 225:1046–1048.
Raisman, G., Field, P.M. 1971. Sexual dimorphism in the preoptic area of the brain. Science
173:731–733.
Rakic, P. 1985a. Limits of neurogenesis in primates. Science 227:154–156.
Rakic, P. 1985b. DNA synthesis and cell division in the adult primate brain. In “Hope for a New
Neurology”, F. Nottebohm, ed., Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., vol 457, pp. 193–211.
Rakic, P. 2002. Neurogenesis in adult primate neocortex: an evaluation of the evidence. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 3:65–71.
Rasika, S., Nottebohm, F., Alvarez-Buylla, A. 1994. Testosterone increases the recruitment and/
or survival of new high vocal center neurons in adult female canaries. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 91:7854–7858.
Rasika, S., Alvarez-Buylla, A., Nottebohm, F. 1999. BDNF mediates the effects of testosterone on
the survival of new neurons in an adult brain. Neuron 22:53–62.
Raymond, P.A., Easter, S.S. 1983. Postembryonic growth of the optic tectum in goldfish.
I. Location of germinal cells and numbers of neurons produced. J. Neurosci.
3:1077–1091.
Roberts, T.F., Tschida, K.A., Klein, M.E., Mooney, R. 2010. Rapid spine stabilization and synaptic enhancement at the onset of behavioural learning. Nature 463:948–952.
Roeder, K.D. 1962. Neural mechanisms of animal behavior. Am. Zool. 2:105–115.
Schaper, A. 1894. Die morphologische und histologische Entwicklung des Kleinhirns. Morphol.
Jahrb, 21:625–670.
Scharff, C., Nottebohm, F. 1991. A comparative study of the behavioral deficits following lesions
of various parts of the zebra finch song system: implications for vocal learning. J. Neurosci.
11:2896–2913.
Scott, B.B., Lois, C. 2007. Developmental origin and identity of song system neurons born during
vocal learning in songbirds. J. Comp. Neurol. 502:202–214.
Seri, B., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., McEwen, B.S., Alvarez-Buylla, A. 2001. Astrocytes give rise to
new neurons in the adult mammalian hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 21:7154–7160.
Simpson, H.B., Vicario, D.S. 1991. Early estrogen treatment of female zebra finches masculinizes
the brain pathway for learned vocalizations. J. Neurobiol. 22:777–793.
Smart, I. 1961. The subependymal layer of mouse brain and its cell production as shown by
radioautography after thymidine-H3 injection. J. Comp. Neurol. 116:325–348.
Stokes, T.C., Leonard, C.M., Nottebohm, F. 1974. The telencephalon, diencephalon and mesencephalon of the canary, Serinus canaria, in stereotaxic coordinates. J. Comp. Neurol.
156:337–374.
Sugita, N. 1918. Comparative studies on the growth of the cerebral cortex. V., pts. I and 11. J. Comp.
Neur. 30:61–117.

84

F. Nottebohm

Thorpe, W.H. 1954. The process of song learning in the chaffinch as studied by means of the
sound spectrograph. Nature 173:465–469.
Thorpe, W.H. 1955. Comments on the “bird fancyer’s delight” together with notes on imitation in
the subsong of the chaffinch. Ibis 97:247–251.
Thorpe, W.H. 1958. The learning of song patterns by birds, with especial reference to the song of
the chaffinch, Fringilla coelebs. Ibis 100:535–570.
Thorpe, W.H., Pilcher, P.M. 1958. The nature and characteristics of sub-song. Br. Birds
51:509–514.
Uzman, L.L. 1960. The histogenesis of the mouse cerebellum as studied by its tritiated thymidine
uptake. J. Comp. Neurol. 114:137–159.
Vates, G.E., Nottebohm, F. 1995. Feedback circuitry within a song learning pathway. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 92:5139–5143.
Vates, G.E., Broome, B.M., Mello, C.V., Nottebohm, F. 1996. Auditory pathways of caudal
telencephalon and their relation to the song system of adult male zebra finches (Taeniopygia
guttata). J. Comp. Neurol. 366:613–642.
Vates, G.E., Vicario, D.S., Nottebohm, F. 1997. Reafferent thalamo-“cortical” loops in the song
system of oscine songbirds. J. Comp. Neurol. 380:275–290.
von Holst, E. 1935. Ueber den Prozess der zentralnervoesen Koordination. Pflueg. Arch. ges.
Physiol. 236:149–158.
von Holst, E., von Saint Paul, U. 1960. Vom Wirkungsgefuege der Triebe. Naturwissenschaften
47:409–422.
Wade, J., Arnold, A.P. 1996. Functional testicular tissue does not masculinize development of the
zebra finch song system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:5264–5268.
Waser, M.S., Marler, P. 1977. Song learning in canaries. J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 91:1–7.
Wiersma, C.A.G. 1962. The organization of the arthropod central nervous system. Am. Zool.
2:67–78.
Wilbrecht, L., Crionas, A., Nottebohm, F. 2002a. Experience affects recruitment of new neurons
but not adult neuron number. J. Neurosci. 22:825–831.
Wilbrecht, L., Petersen, T., Nottebohm, 2002b. Bilateral LMAN lesions cancel differences
in HVC neuronal recruitment induced by unilateral syringeal denervation. J. Comp. Physiol.
A 188:909–915.
Wilbrecht, L., Williams, H., Gangadhar, N., Nottebohm, F. 2006. High levels of new neuron
addition persist when the sensitive period for song learning is experimentally prolonged.
J. Neurosci. 26:9135–9141.
Williams, H., Nottebohm, F. 1985. Auditory responses in avian vocal motor neurons: a motor
theory for song perception in birds. Science 229:279–282.
Williams, H., Crane, L.A., Hale, T.K., Esposito, M.A., Nottebohm, F. 1992. Right side dominance
for song control in the zebra finch. J. Neurobiol. 23:1006–1020.
Wilson, D.M. 1961. The central nervous control of flight in the locust. J. Exp. Biol. 38:471–490.
Yu, A.C., Margoliash, D. 1996. Temporal hierarchical control of singing in birds. Science
273:1871–1875.

Part II

Basic Aspects of Neurogenesis

Chapter 3

Fate Specification of Neural Stem Cells
Masakazu Namihira and Kinichi Nakashima

Abstract  Neural stem cells (NSCs) possess the ability to self-renew and to
d­ ifferentiate along neuronal and glial lineages. At the molecular level, these
­processes are currently defined in terms of a dynamic interplay between extracellular
cues, including cytokine signaling, and intracellular programs such as epigenetic
modification, including histone methylation and acetylation and DNA methylation.
This review discusses recent advances in our understanding of the molecular mechanisms that control the specification of neuronal, astroglial, and oligodendroglial
fates in NSCs of the developing and adult central nervous system.

3.1 Introduction
Neural stem cells (NSCs) are defined as cells that possess the ability to self-renew
and to generate the three major cell types in the central nervous system (CNS):
neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes (reviewed in Gage, 2000; Okano, 2002;
Temple, 2001). The molecular mechanisms controlling the specification of neural
cell fates have been the focus of intense research in recent years. Mechanisms that
specify cell fate in adult progenitors are receiving particular attention because of
the lessons they may teach us about how to treat neurological diseases by controlling the behavior of transplanted or endogenous progenitors.
During brain development, telencephalic neuroepithelial cells, including NSCs,
divide symmetrically in early gestation to increase their own numbers (Temple,
2001). These cells then undergo neurogenesis through mostly asymmetrical division, each giving rise to two distinct daughter cells: another NSC with the same
potential as its mother cell, and a neuron. Toward the end of the neurogenic phase,
NSCs eventually acquire multipotentiality, becoming able to generate astrocytes

M. Namihira and K. Nakashima (*)
Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, Graduate School of Biological
Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and Technology,
8916-5 Takayama-cho, Ikoma 630-0101, Japan
e-mail: kin@bs.naist.jp
T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_3, © Springer 2011

87

88

M. Namihira and K. Nakashima

and oligodendrocytes in addition to neurons (Qian et al., 2000). Adult NSCs have
been found in the two principal neurogenic regions, the subgranular zone (SGZ) of
the hippocampus and the subventricular zone (SVZ), both in  vivo and in  vitro
(Cameron et  al., 1993; Gage et  al., 1998; Garcia-Verdugo et  al., 1998). Even in
certain nonneurogenic regions, including the spinal cord, there exist cells harboring
the traits of NSCs when cultured in vitro (Gage, 2000).
Although the mechanisms of NSC fate determination are not yet fully
­understood, it is gradually becoming apparent that both extracellular cues including
cytokine signaling and intracellular programs such as epigenetic gene regulation
are deeply involved in their fate specification. The term “epigenetic mechanism”
refers to any heritable influence (in the progeny of cells or of individuals) on chromosome or gene function that is not accompanied by a change in DNA sequence
(Yoder et  al., 1997), and includes processes such as DNA methylation, histone
modification, and noncoding RNA expression. These epigenetic modifications
ensure appropriate gene activation at each step of NSC differentiation.
In this review, we focus on molecular mechanisms that regulate the specification
of neuronal, astroglial, and oligodendroglial fates in NSCs. We discuss fate specification not only in adult NSCs but also in those of the developing brain and spinal
cord, because it is conceivable that our knowledge of mechanisms operating in
embryonic NSC may also pertain to those in adult NSCs. The regulation of progenitor proliferation, self-renewal, and specification of neuronal subtype identities have
been excellently reviewed elsewhere (Campbell, 2005; Molofsky et al., 2004) and
are not discussed here.

3.2 Molecular Mechanisms Regulating Neuronal Fate
We focus first on the major transcription factors and epigenetic regulation governing
neuronal fate determination. Accumulating evidence suggests that different steps of
adult neurogenesis are also regulated by physiological and pathological stimuli,
including an enriched environment, stress, learning, and seizures (Ming and Song,
2005); these topics are covered by other authors in this book.

3.2.1 Neurogenic bHLH
Recent experiments have shown that proliferation, specification, and differentiation
of NSCs are controlled to a large extent by transcription factors with basic
­helix-loop-helix (bHLH) motifs. The bHLH transcription factors (named after the
structural motif that mediates their DNA-binding and dimerization functions)
(Murre et al., 1989) are a large family, with 125 members encoded in the human
genome (Ledent et al., 2002). In an NSC that is destined to become a neuron, the
transition from proliferation to neurogenesis is accompanied by an increase in
proneural bHLH factor expression. Neurogenesis is mediated by two broad categories

3  Fate Specification of Neural Stem Cells

89

of bHLH factors: proneural bHLH factors [e.g., NEUROGENIN1, NEUROGENIN 2
(NGNs), and MASH], which are involved in initiating neurogenesis, and neuronal
differentiation bHLH factors (e.g., NEUROD), which facilitate terminal differentiation. These bHLH proteins bind DNA as heterodimers complexed with E proteins
(E12, E47, E2-2, HEB) (Fig. 3.1). The bHLH domain mediates interaction with DNA
sequences that contain the core hexanucleotide motif CANNTG, known as the
E box (reviewed in Bertrand et al., 2002). Transactivation is mediated by the interaction of bHLH heterodimers with coactivators, such as p300/CBP and PCAF
(Fig. 3.1), which then recruit a large complex that includes the basal transcriptional
machinery. These coactivators also facilitate transcription by acetylating histones,
leading to the unraveling of DNA from a tightly packed structure to one that
is accessible to the transcriptional machinery. Conversely, the bHLH proteins
are negatively regulated by another set of bHLH factors, such as HES-1 and
HES-5 (where Hes is a homologue of hairy and enhancer of split) (Fig. 3.1). These

BMP signal
Active
Smads

Proneural
bHLH proteins
NEUROGENIN1
MASH1

Plasma
membrane

Cleaved
Notch
(NICD)

Nuclear
membrane

Ubiquitous
bHLH proteins
E12
E47
Id1 gene
Id3 gene

ID1 HES-1
ID3 HES-5
P300 /
CBP

E-box

Notch
signal

RBP-J/k

Hes-1 gene

Hes-5 gene

Negative regulatory
HLH proteins
Neuronal genes

Fig.  3.1  Regulation of neuronal differentiation by bHLH factors. Several tissue-specific basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors, such as NEUROGENIN1, dimerize with E proteins, such as E12,
and bind to DNA elements termed E-boxes (CANNTG) to promote the expression of target neuronal genes. Activation of BMP and Notch signaling upregulates the expression of negative HLH
factors. The ID and HES proteins, which inhibit the function of proneural bHLH transcription
factors by competitively binding to their heterodimerization partners E12 and E47, leading to suppression of neurogenesis of neural stem cells (NSCs). When Notch is activated by its ligands, such
as Delta, proteolysis occurs and the intracellular domain of Notch (NICD) is translocated into the
nucleus and complexes with RBP-J/k. This complex activates transcription of Hes-1 and Hes-5.
Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-activated Smads also induces Hes-5 expression but it requires
the NICD/RBP-Jk complex, implying cross-talk between Notch and BMP signaling

90

M. Namihira and K. Nakashima

­ ammalian bHLH proteins are distant relatives of the product of the Drosophila
m
pair-rule gene hairy (Akazawa et al., 1992; Ohtsuka et al., 1999). The expression of
Hes-1 and Hes-5 is known to be induced by Notch signaling and has been ­suggested
to inhibit transcriptional activity of neurogenic bHLH proteins by competitive­
binding to their heterodimer partners E12 and E47 (Fig. 3.1) (Akazawa et al., 1992;
Ohtsuka et al., 1999). Another type of negative regulator of HLH proteins is the ID
(for inhibitor of differentiation) family of proteins, which have an HLH domain but
lack a basic region (Norton et al., 1998). ID proteins inhibit the function of tissuespecific bHLH factors by a mechanism analogous to that used by HES proteins (see
Fig. 3.1) (Norton et al., 1998).
An important subject for future studies of neuronal differentiation is the nature
of the regulatory mechanisms that initiate the expression of proneural bHLH genes.
Although members of the HES family are known to repress the expression of
Mash1 (Chen et al., 1997), the signaling pathways that upregulate proneural factor
activity are largely unknown. NGN1, NGN2, and MASH1 all have consensus
sequences that correspond to glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) phosphorylation
sites, which may represent a common mechanism to regulate the activity of these
bHLH factors (Moore et al., 2002). Because two families of morphogens, Wnts and
FGFs, are known to regulate the activity of GSK3, it is tempting to speculate that
bHLH factors couple extrinsic signals and intrinsic pathways through GSK3mediated phosphorylation. Moreover, the promoters of Ngn1 and Ngn2 can be
directly activated by a b-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF) complex in transfected cells
(Hirabayashi et al., 2004; Israsena et al., 2004), and Ngn2 expression is lost in mice
with a cortical-specific deletion of b-catenin (Machon et al., 2003), suggesting that
Wnt signaling promotes neurogenesis by directly inducing expression of Ngn1/2.

3.2.2 Epigenetic Modification in Neuronal
Differentiation of NSCs
3.2.2.1 Chromatin Modification
Chromatin modification plays a critical role in the regulation of cell type-specific
gene expression. The cell has two basic tools at its disposal to dynamically regulate
chromatin state: covalent modification of chromatin, which includes histone
­modifications such as acetylation and methylation at specific positions, and ATPdependent chromatin remodeling.
One of the best characterized histone modifications is lysine acetylation, which
is mediated by two groups of enzymes: histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and
­histone deacetylases (HDACs). HATs induce acetylation of N-terminal histone
tails, which is considered to decrease the interaction of the positively charged
histone tails with the negatively charged phosphate backbone of DNA and hence
result in relaxation of the nucleosomes. HDACs catalyze the reverse reaction; in the
deacetylated state, histones package DNA into condensed chromatin, which in

3  Fate Specification of Neural Stem Cells

91

turn prevents access of transcriptional activators to their target sequences, thus
resulting in transcriptional repression (Hsieh and Gage, 2004). The well-known
antiepileptic valproic acid (VPA) functions as an inhibitor of HDACs. VPA
has been shown to induce neuronal differentiation of adult NSCs (Fig. 3.2a) (Hsieh
et  al., 2004a). In addition, VPA inhibits glial cell differentiation of NSCs, even
under conditions that favor lineage-specific differentiation. Among the VPAupregulated neuron-specific genes is NeuroD, whose overexpression in NSCs
results in the induction and suppression of neuronal and glial differentiation,
a

NSCs

Neurons

HDAC inhibitor

HDAC

HDAC

NeuroD

b

Ac

Ac

45a

45b/c

BRG/BRM
53a

Neuronal differentiation

BRG/BRM
53b

Genes involved in
proliferation of NSCs

c
HDAC
MeCP2
Me

Me

DNA

NeuroD

Depolarization
class II
Neuronal genes

Histone protein

Neuronal genes

HDAC P
MeCP2

Me

Me : Methylation

Me

class II
Neuronal genes

Ac : Acetylation

Fig. 3.2  Epigenetic modification regulating neuronal differentiation. (a) Histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitors, such as valproic acid (VPA), promote neuronal fate through the induction of
neurogenic transcription factors including NeuroD. (b) Brahma (BRM)-associated factor (BAF)
chromatin remodeling complexes, also known as SWI/SNF complexes, comprise a catalytic
­subunit (BRG/BRM) and additional core subunits. Neural progenitor-specific BAF (npBAF)
­complexes contain two additional subunits, BAF45a and BAF53a. During neuronal differentiation,
these are exchanged for neuron-specific homologous proteins, BAF45b/c and BAF53b, thus forming
postmitotic neuron-specific BAF (nBAF) complexes. Although npBAF complexes specify gene
expression patterns necessary for NSC proliferation, the switch in cofactor composition is critical
for neuronal differentiation. (c) Class II neuronal genes are bound by CoREST (not indicated) and
MeCP2 complexes on adjacent methylated CpGs in their promoters throughout neuronal differentiation. Upon membrane depolarization, MeCP2 becomes phosphorylated and dissociates from the
chromatin of target genes, resulting in maximal levels of the gene expression

92

M. Namihira and K. Nakashima

respectively. Taken together, these results suggest that VPA simultaneously
­promotes neuronal fate and inhibits glial fate through the induction of neurogenic
transcription factors, including NEUROD (Hsieh et al., 2004a).
ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling is carried out by enzyme complexes that
use ATP hydrolysis to slide histone octamers around which nucleosomal DNA is
wrapped, thus exposing the DNA and facilitating the binding of sequence-specific
transcription factors (reviewed in de la Serna et al., 2006). Among these, the best
understood chromatin remodelers belong to the family of Brahma-related gene
(BRG)/Brahma (BRM)-associated factor (BAF) complexes, also known as SWI/
SNF complexes. Similar to most large enzyme machines, SWI/SNF ­complexes are
composed of a set of central subunits that provides the core enzymatic activity of
the complex, along with several associated factors which serve specialized roles in
substrate targeting, recruitment of additional regulatory machinery, or both
(Fig. 3.2b). An intriguing possibility is that homologues of individual BAFs are
assembled into the SWI/SNF complex in a mutually exclusive fashion, allowing
for a combinatorial variety of SWI/SNF complexes with distinct functions during
development and in the adult. Association of neural bHLH proteins with BRG1, a
catalytic subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex, has also been
shown to be important for their neurogenic activity in Xenopus embryos and in the
mammalian embryonic carcinoma cell line P19 (Seo et al., 2005). By demonstrating two functionally relevant cofactor swaps in the SWI/SNF complex during
­development of the murine brain, Lessard et al. (2007) ­provide evidence that SWI/
SNF subunit composition can indeed regulate fate specification of NSCs in mouse
brain during development (Fig. 3.2b). Examination of the expression patterns of
BAF45 and BAF53 homologues during brain development revealed a tight switch:
around embryonic day 12–13 (E12–13), BAF45a and BAF53a give way to
BAF45b/c and BAF53b, respectively. This event occurs around the same time that
neural stem/progenitor cells in the developing brain cease to proliferate and start
to differentiate into neurons. Indeed, immunofluorescence staining for these BAFs
in E12.5 spinal cord showed mutually exclusive expression patterns, with BAF45a
and BAF53a confined to proliferative regions and BAF45b/c and BAF53b mainly
expressed in the differentiated zone. These data suggested the existence of two
distinct SWI/SNF complexes during development: a neural progenitor-specific
complex, termed npBAF (BAF45a and BAF53a), and a postmitotic neuron-specific
complex, nBAF (BAF45b/c and BAF53b) (Lessard et  al., 2007) (see Fig. 3.2b).
Lessard et al. also showed that neural progenitor-specific BAF45a gain-of-function
led to an increase in the mitotic index of cells both in  vivo and in cell culture,
whereas BAF45a loss-of-function, BAF53a loss-of-function, or both reduced
the cell proliferation rate in cultured cells without affecting the survival or extent
of neuronal differentiation. Cortical cultures and neurospheres prepared from
these Brg-deficient embryos showed reduced mitotic index and self-renewal
capacity, respectively (Lessard et al., 2007). These findings clearly show that BAF
­complexes exert their effect on cell proliferation and differentiation by producing
substantial changes in gene expression programs in a chromatin-dependent
­manner (Fig. 3.2b).

3  Fate Specification of Neural Stem Cells

93

The RE1-silencing transcription factor REST (Chong et al., 1995), also known
as neuron-restrictive silencer factor NRSF (REST/NRSF) (Schoenherr and
Anderson, 1995), plays a fundamental role in the progression of pluripotent cells to
lineage-restricted neural progenitors (Ballas et al., 2005; Ballas and Mandel, 2005).
REST/NRSF is a zinc finger protein and blocks transcription of its target genes by
binding to a specific consensus 21- to 23-base-pair (bp) RE1-binding site/neuronrestrictive silencer element (RE1/NRSE) that is present in a large number of genes
encoding proteins relevant to fundamental neuronal traits (Schoenherr et al., 1996),
such as ion channels, synaptic vesicle proteins, and neurotransmitter receptors.
Accordingly, REST/NRSF prevents premature expression of terminal differentiation genes in NSCs (for a review, see Schoenherr et al., 1996). REST/NRSF bound
to the RE1/NRSE site of neuronal genes in embryonic stem (ES) cells, and neuronal
gene chromatin in ES cells was maintained in a poised state via a specialized
REST/NRSF repressor complex, including CoREST, HDAC1, and MeCP2, that
permitted basal expression of neuronal genes at a very low level. When ES cells
differentiate into neural progenitors, REST/NRSF protein was downregulated by
proteasomal degradation and the REST/NRSF repressor complex disappeared from
the RE-1/NRSE site in the promoter regions of neuronal genes, with the result that
the genes became derepressed and activated in neurons (Ballas et al., 2005). It is
suggested that the loss of REST/NRSF in neurons leads to the expression of two
classes of RE-1/NRSE-containing neuronal genes (Ballas et  al., 2005). Class I
genes were expressed by default, relying solely on dissociation of the REST/NRSF
repressor complex from the RE-1/NRSE site for maximal expression. In contrast,
class II genes, typified by brain-derived neurotrophic factor (bdnf) and calbindin
genes, contain, in addition to the REST/NRSF complex at the RE-1/NRSE site,
CoREST and MeCP2 complexes on adjacent methylated CpGs in their promoters
that remained bound throughout differentiation (Fig. 3.2c). Upon depolarization of
neural cells, while CoREST remained bound to the chromatin, MeCP2 became
phosphorylated and dissociated, together with HDAC and mSin3, from the chromatin
of class II genes, leading to a maximal level of expression (Fig. 3.2c). The calbindin
and bdnf genes are representative of a large class of genes whose expression is
upregulated in neurons by disruption of HDAC activity and, in some cases, also by
depolarization (see Fig. 3.2c). Many genes in this class are implicated in the
­functional plasticity of neurons in vivo (Ballas and Mandel, 2005).
3.2.2.2 ncRNA
Noncoding (nc) RNAs, including small interfering (si) RNA and micro (mi) RNA,
appear to play important roles in various biological processes such as X-inactivation
in mammals, transcriptional and posttranscriptional gene silencing in plants, and
lineage-specific differentiation in hematopoietic stem cells (Hsieh and Gage, 2004).
A novel small double-stranded (ds) ncRNA has been reported to play a critical
role in mediating neuronal differentiation (Kuwabara et al., 2004). The sequence of
this ncRNA matches RE1/NRSE, the binding site for REST/NRSF. These dsRNA

94

M. Namihira and K. Nakashima

­ olecules are specifically expressed in adult NSCs early in their differentiation. At
m
the onset of neuronal differentiation, NRSE dsRNAs are proposed to interact with
the REST/NRSF complex and trigger a conformational change, which prevents its
association with corepressor proteins such as HDACs and methyl DNA-binding
proteins, thus converting REST/NRSF from a repressor to an activator. This type of
dsRNA has been named small modulatory (sm) RNA, and the discovery of smRNA
extends the important contribution of ncRNAs as key regulators in cell behavior at
both transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels.
miRNAs regulate several aspects of development. Among miRNAs expressed
predominantly in neural tissues, miR-124a has been shown to participate in the
­differentiation of NSCs into neurons by mediating degradation of nonneuronal gene
transcripts (Conaco et al., 2006). This study indicated that miR-124a expression is
regulated by REST/NRSF. As described earlier, REST/NRSF is known to recruit
HDACs via corepressors associated with its repressor domains to suppress target
gene expression (Andres et al., 1999; Battaglioli et al., 2002; Roopra et al., 2000).
Therefore, in neural progenitors expressing REST/NRSF, suppression of miR-124a
expression by REST/NRSF permits the existence of nonneuronal gene transcripts
in the cells. In differentiated neurons, in which REST is no longer present on the
miR-124a gene chromatin, miR-124a is expressed, causing rapid degradation of
nonneuronal transcripts. REST/NRSF thus links transcriptional and posttranscriptional events to fine-tune the balance of phenotype between neuronal and
­nonneuronal cells.

3.3 Molecular Mechanisms Regulating Glial Fates
3.3.1 Astrocytes
Astrocytes have traditionally been viewed as a neural cell population with structural
and supportive roles such as supplying essential substrates to neurons and participating in the blood–brain barrier (Kettenmann and Ransom, 1988). It is now recognized not only that certain astrocytic cell subpopulations have stem cell properties
(Doetsch, 2003), but also that others even modulate directly the development and
activity of the synapse (Christopherson et al., 2005). In many cases, astrocyte differentiation is characterized both in vivo and in vitro by the expression of the two
most typical astrocyte-specific markers, the intermediate filament glial fibrillary
acidic protein (GFAP) and the calcium-binding protein S100b. Regulation of the
gfap and S100b promoters has been used as the main model to examine the molecular mechanisms controlling astrocyte fate specification and differentiation. These
genes are not thought to have a role in selection of the astroglial lineage, but it is
assumed that the mechanisms involved in regulating their expression also operate
on yet-unidentified genes involved in specification of astroglial fate. A number of
signaling pathways have been shown to promote the commitment of progenitors to
the astroglial fate. These different pathways synergize extensively, either at the
level of their signaling cascades or directly on the gfap promoter (Fig. 3.3a).

3  Fate Specification of Neural Stem Cells

a

IL-6 family
cytokine signal

95

BMP signal

gp130

Notch signal
Plasma
membrane

Smad4

P

Cleaved
Notch
(NICD)

Active
Smads

P

STAT3

STAT3

JAK

Nuclear
membrane

NFIA/B
Active
Smads

p300

Notch-IC

Smad4

P

STAT3

P

gfap gene
RBP-J/k

Mid-gestational
NSCs

Late-gestational
NSCs

Astrocyte

bFGF
CNTF
P300 /
CBP

GFAP

GFAP
Me

STAT3

b

GFAP

Me
Me

H3K4

Me

H3K4

H3K9

H3K9

Me

Me

Fig.  3.3  Molecular mechanisms of astrocyte differentiation. (a) JAK-STAT, BMP-Smad, and
Notch signaling pathways and transcriptional factor NFIA/B regulate the astrocyte-specific gene
gfap. Synergistic integration of leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and BMP2 signaling is achieved
by complex formation of their respective downstream transcription factors, STAT3 and Smads,
together with p300. (See text for details.) (b) Epigenetic modification regulating astrocyte differentiation in the developing brain. At midgestation, when neuroepithelial cells differentiate only
into neurons, the STAT3-binding site in the astrocyte-specific gfap promoter is highly methylated.
Therefore, even if the cells are surrounded by STAT3-activating cytokine, STAT3 cannot activate
target gene transcription. As gestation proceeds, the STAT3-binding site becomes demethylated,
enabling STAT3 to bind its recognition sequence and to induce gene expression. Thus, DNA
methylation in a cell type-specific gene promoter is a critical determinant for NSCs to acquire
multipotentiality for differentiation during development. In late-gestational NSCs, cotreatment
with fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) and ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) leads to a marked
increase in the fraction of cells that express gfap. FGF2 facilitates access of the STAT/CBP
­complex to the gfap promoter by inducing H3K4 methylation and suppressing H3K9 methylation
around the STAT3-binding site

3.3.1.1 Signaling Pathways Promoting Astroglial Fate
Cytokines in the interleukin-6 (IL-6) family have been suggested to have the potential
to induce astrocytic differentiation of NSCs (Bonni et  al., 1997). IL-6 members
[i.e., IL-6, IL-11, leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), oncostatin M (OSM), ciliary
neurotrophic factor (CNTF), cardiotrophin-1, and cardiotrophin-like cytokine]
share the membrane glycoprotein gp130 in their functional receptor complexes as
a critical component for signal transduction (Elson et  al., 2000; Lelievre et  al.,
2001; Taga and Kishimoto, 1997). Upon binding of an IL-6 family member to its
specific receptor, gp130 dimerizes either with itself or with another partner, such as

96

M. Namihira and K. Nakashima

the LIF or OSM receptor, depending on the type of cytokine (Taga and Kishimoto,
1997). This dimerization of gp130 is known to lead to activation of the Janus
tyrosine kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT)
­pathway. The subsequent binding of activated STAT1/STAT3 to a consensus site in
the gfap promoter plays a major role in transcriptional activation of the gfap gene
(Bonni et al., 1997; Nakashima et al., 1999) (Fig. 3.3a).
Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), members of the transforming growth
factor-b (TGF-b) superfamily, signal through a heterotetrameric serine/threonine
kinase receptor complex composed of two type I and two type II receptor molecules. Activated BMP receptors phosphorylate C-terminally located serine residues
in the downstream transcription factors Smad1, Smad5, and Smad8 (Wrana,
2000), which then bind with the common mediator Smad protein Smad4, and the
resultant ­complex accumulates in the nucleus to activate transcription of specific
genes (see Fig. 3.2). The inhibitory Smad proteins Smad6 and Smad7 have been
shown to repress the function of BMPs by inhibiting receptor-mediated phosphorylation of Smad1 or Smad5, or by competing with Smad4 for binding to Smad1.
The astrogliogenic activity of BMPs is strongly enhanced by JAK-STAT signaling.
The synergy between these two pathways reflects the formation of a complex
comprising the downstream transcription factors STAT1/STAT3 and Smad1/
Smad4 bound to nearby sites in the gfap promoter, as well as the recruitment of
the coactivator P300, resulting in the synergistic activation of gfap (see Fig. 3.3a)
(Nakashima et al., 1999).
BMPs have been shown to promote neuronal differentiation in early cortical
explant cultures at E12–E13 in the mouse (Li et  al., 1998). In older progenitor
cultures (E14 and later), however, BMP2 and BMP4 instead promote astrocyte
­differentiation and repress the alternate neuronal and oligodendrocytic fates
(Gross et al., 1996; Nakashima et al., 2001). Inhibition of neurogenesis by BMP2
involves induction of the antineurogenic transcription factors Id1, Id3, and Hes-5
(Nakashima et  al., 2001). Although Id1 and Id3 are direct targets of the BMPsignaling pathway, BMP collaborates with the Notch-signaling pathway to induce
Hes-5 expression; BMP-activated Smad1 forms a complex with Notch-ICD
(Notch-intracellular domain) and the coactivators P300 and P/CAF on the Hes-5
promoter, resulting in enhanced expression of Hes-5 (Takizawa et al., 2003) (see
Fig. 3.1). HES and ID proteins sequester E proteins, the dimerization partners of
the proneural bHLH proteins Mash1 and NGNs, thereby blocking their activity
and promoting the ­degradation of Mash1 (Vinals et al., 2004). Inhibition of oligodendrogenesis by BMPs also involves the induction of ID proteins that dimerize
with oligodendrocyte-inducing bHLH transcription factors (OLIGs; see below)
and their E protein partners, and thus block their oligodendroglial-promoting
activity (Samanta and Kessler, 2004).
BMPs and BMP receptors are expressed in the adult SVZ, and BMP signaling
also promotes astroglial differentiation and inhibits neurogenesis in this system.
However, the BMP inhibitor Noggin is expressed by ependymal cells adjacent to
the SVZ, suggesting that Noggin creates a neurogenic niche in the SVZ that
­promotes neurogenesis through inhibition of BMP signaling (Lim et al., 2000).

3  Fate Specification of Neural Stem Cells

97

The activation of Notch signaling not only inhibits neurogenesis but also promotes
gliogenesis, as first demonstrated in the peripheral nervous system and retina
(Morrison et al., 2000; Furukawa et al., 2000). Similar findings were then reported
for embryonic telencephalic NSCs (Chambers et al., 2001; Grandbarbe et al., 2003)
and adult hippocampal NSCs (Tanigaki et  al., 2001), suggesting that this is a
­general function of Notch. Analysis of Notch receptor activity in the mouse with a
fluorescent reporter (Kohyama et  al., 2005) or with an antibody specific for an
activated form of Notch1 (Tokunaga et al., 2004) showed that the pathway is indeed
active in radial glial cells as well as transiently in immature gfap-positive astrocytes. Notch has been proposed to induce astrogliogenesis directly through activation of the gfap promoter by a transcriptional complex involving the Notch-ICD
and the DNA-binding protein RBP-J/k (also termed CSL, CBF1, and suppressor of
hairless) (see Fig. 3.3a) (Ge et  al., 2002). Interestingly, RBP-J/k represses gfap
transcription in self-renewing progenitors when bound with the corepressor N-CoR
(Hermanson et  al., 2002), suggesting that activation of gfap transcription at the
onset of astrogliogenesis involves the replacement of N-CoR by Notch-ICD, resulting
in a functional switch for RBP-J/k from transcriptional repressor to activator.
Importantly, although Notch activation has already started at midgestation, when
active neurogenesis is occurring, it maintains progenitors in an undifferentiated
state rather than promoting astrogenesis, providing evidence that Notch function is
influenced by the cellular context, a recurrent theme with signaling pathways
­specifying neural cell fates.
3.3.1.2 Transcription Factors Inducing Astrogenesis
Recently, Deneen et  al. reported that nuclear factor I/A (NFIA) and B (NFIB),
members of a family of CCAAT box element-binding transcription factors
(Gronostajski, 2000), are both necessary and sufficient to promote glial fate specification in embryonic spinal cord progenitors in vivo (Deneen et al., 2006). Their
previous studies had shown that adult mice deficient in NFIA or NFIB exhibited a
reduction in cortical GFAP expression (das Neves et  al., 1999; Steele-Perkins
et al., 2005), as well as a reduction in the number of midline glia (Shu et al., 2003).
They then reported that in E18.5 embryos lacking either NFIA or NFIB, a reduction in spinal cord GFAP expression was also observed (Deneen et  al., 2006).
Furthermore, misexpression of NFIA or NFIB was sufficient to accelerate GFAP
expression in astrocytic precursors by several days, in vivo and in vitro. These data
argue that NFIA/B promote the terminal differentiation of astrocytes. This role of
NFIA/B is likely to be direct, as functional NFI-binding sites have been identified
in the gfap promoter (see Fig. 3.3a) (Cebolla and Vallejo, 2006). It will be important to ­determine the relationship between NFIA/B and other regulators of gfap
­expression, such as in the JAK/STAT and BMP/SMAD pathways (Bonni et  al.,
1997; Nakashima et al., 1999).
In addition to NFIA/B, stem cell leukemia (Scl, also known as Tal1), which
encodes a bHLH transcription factor, is important for the regulation of both ­astrocyte

98

M. Namihira and K. Nakashima

versus oligodendrocyte cell fate acquisition and V2b versus V2a interneuron cell
fate acquisition in the p2 domain of the developing vertebrate spinal cord (Muroyama
et  al., 2005). In the developing spinal cord, after V2 interneuron ­production, p2
progenitors give rise to a wave of astrocyte precursors (Zhou and Anderson, 2002;
Stolt et al., 2003). A significant decrease in p2 domain-associated S100b-expressing
cells in conditionally knocked-out mice, in which the Scl gene is specifically ablated
in NSCs, was observed at E14 compared with controls. In ­contrast, these mice
showed an increased number of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OLPs) that were
normally located in the dorsal part of the spinal cord at E14. Furthermore, by forced
expression of mouse Scl in the chick neural tube, ectopic development of S100bexpressing cells and robust induction of other astrocyte-specific marker genes were
shown at the pMN domain, where motor neurons develop under normal conditions.
These findings suggest that SCL function is ­necessary and sufficient for p2-associated astrocyte development, and that it represses the production of OLPs in the
developing spinal cord (Muroyama et al., 2005).
3.3.1.3 Epigenetic Modification Regulating Astrocyte Differentiation
Methylation of genomic DNA at CpG dinucleotides is one of the major epigenetic
modifications of mammalian genomes, implicated in processes such as genomic
imprinting, X chromosome inactivation, aging, tumorigenesis, and the regulation of
tissue-specific gene expression (Robertson and Jones, 2000). In these biological
processes, CpG methylation contributes in a general way to transcriptional
­suppression by favoring the formation of inactive chromatin or by preventing
­transcriptional regulators from binding to their target DNA elements. It has become
increasingly evident that DNA methylation also participates in the acquisition of
multipotentiality of NSCs during development.
As already described, NSCs lack multipotentiality in early gestation and only
differentiate into neurons during midgestation. NSCs then gradually acquire
­multipotentiality and differentiate into astrocytes and oligodendrocytes in late gestation (Temple, 2001). DNA methylation in astrocyte-specific gene promoters may
be a critical cell-intrinsic determinant of NSC differentiation into astrocytes in the
fetal brain (see Fig. 3.3b) (Takizawa et  al., 2001). The IL-6 family of cytokines,
including LIF and CNTF, efficiently induce astrocytic differentiation of NSCs
through activation of the JAK/STAT pathway, as indicated earlier (Bonni et  al.,
1997; Nakashima et al., 1999). However, in contrast to cultures of neuroepithelial
cells prepared from mouse telencephalon at E14 (relatively late gestation), GFAP
was not induced in a culture of telencephalic neuroepithelial cells at E11 (midgestation) even when stimulated with the JAK/STAT pathway-activating cytokine LIF
(Takizawa et al., 2001). Furthermore, the methylation target sequence CpG occurs
in the STAT-binding element (TTCGGAGAA) itself within the gfap promoter, and
this element is conserved in the mouse, rat, and human (Bonni et  al., 1997;
Nakashima et  al., 1999). Given these findings, the methylation status of this
­particular STAT-binding site was compared between E11 and E14 neuroepithelial
cells. These experiments revealed that the STAT-binding site was hypermethylated

3  Fate Specification of Neural Stem Cells

99

in E11 neuroepithelial cells, which do not respond to LIF to induce gfap expression,
but was barely methylated in E14 neuroepithelial cells, which have the potential to
express gfap in response to LIF stimulation (see Fig. 3.3b) (Takizawa et al., 2001).
Moreover, STAT3 does not bind to the methylated form of its target sequence,
explaining the lack of response of the gfap promoter to cytokine stimulation
(Takizawa et al., 2001). S100b is also an astrocytic marker and is expressed during
earlier stages of astrocytic differentiation than is GFAP. A particular cytosine
­residue in the S100b promoter becomes demethylated, correlating with the onset of
S100b expression in the brain at E14 (Namihira et al., 2004). In addition, another
astrocyte-inducing cytokine, BMP2, increases histone acetylation around the CpG
site in neuroepithelial cells at E14, but not at E11 when S100b expression is not yet
observed in vivo. Thus, it is conceivable that DNA methylation plays an important
role in defining the timing of NSC fate specification (see Fig. 3.3b).
The importance of this methylation in vivo was subsequently demonstrated by
analysis of a conditional knockout of the DNA methyltransferase 1 (dnmt1) gene in
NSCs (Fan et al., 2005). The brains of these mice displayed decreased numbers of
neurons, precocious astrogenesis, and aberrant upregulation of the gfap and S100b
genes. Interestingly, genes in the gp130-JAK-STAT pathway were also derepressed
in dnmt1-deficient NSCs, and STAT3 inhibition abolished the observed increase in
gliogenesis (Fan et al., 2005). A subsequent study provided further support for the
idea that methylation of genes in the gp130-JAK-STAT pathway regulated the
­gliogenic potential of cortical NSCs, and also demonstrated that the cytokines
themselves enhanced the expression of their cognate pathway molecules, thereby
defining a positive feed-forward loop (He et  al., 2005). These data suggest that
DNA methylation regulates the timing and magnitude of astrocytic differentiation
through both modulation of JAK-STAT activity and direct inhibition of glial marker
genes via inactive chromatin modifications (Fan et al., 2005).
Recently, fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF2), which by itself is not capable of
inducing astrocyte-specific gene expression, has been reported to positively affect
the ability of CNTF, an IL-6 cytokine family member, to induce expression of
GFAP (see Fig. 3.3b) (Song and Ghosh, 2004). FGF2 promotes access of a complex
involving STAT3 and a HAT, CREB-binding protein (CBP), to the gfap promoter
by inducing H3K4 methylation while suppressing H3K9 methylation at the STATbinding site. These findings suggest that extracellular signals can modulate the
accessibility of transcription factors to gene promoters by changing in local histone
modification (Fig. 3.3b).

3.3.2 Oligodendrocytes
Once most cortical neurons have migrated to their correct positions, they are ­surrounded
by astrocytes to form functional synapses. At approximately this time, oligodendrocytic differentiation begins. Oligodendrocytes tend to arise from ­specific locations
within the CNS, in particular the ventral region of the neural tube, and migrate into
the white ­matter of the CNS to myelinate axons (reviewed in Noctor et al., 2004).

100

M. Namihira and K. Nakashima

3.3.2.1 Signaling Pathways Regulating Oligodendroglial Fate
Injection of neutralizing antibodies against Sonic hedgehog (Shh) into wild-type
and Shh-knockout mice suggested that Shh is important for the generation of
­oligodendrocytes and their precursors. Furthermore, ectopic administration of Shh,
or transplantation of notochord, where Shh is produced, to dorsal spinal cord leads
to ectopic oligodendrocyte generation, suggesting that Shh plays a critical role in
oligodendrocytic differentiation (Pringle et al., 1998). Shh promotes oligodendrogenesis by inducing the expression of OLIG1 and OLIG2, two essential determinants of oligodendrocytic fate, in ventral telencephalic progenitors (Lu et al., 2000;
Yung et al., 2002). Gain- and loss-of-function experiments in mice have shown that
Shh is both necessary and sufficient to induce OLIG1 and OLIG2 expression in the
telencephalon (Lu et al., 2000; Nery et al., 2001; Zhou et al., 2000).
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) has also been shown to be an important
factor, maintaining proliferation of oligodendrocyte precursors as well as stimulating their differentiation into mature oligodendrocytes (Lee et al., 2000). However,
it remains unclear whether PDGF also has an earlier role in specification of OLPs.
PDGF receptor is expressed by a subset of stem cells in the adult SVZ, and PDGF
signaling in the SVZ promotes the generation of oligodendrocytes, possibly at the
expense of neuronal production (Jackson et  al., 2006). Whether PDGF is indeed
involved in a fate choice between oligodendroglial and neuronal lineages in stem
cells of the adult SVZ, and whether it has a similar role in the embryonic CNS,
remains to be determined. Recently, insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I has been
reported to promote the differentiation of adult NSCs to an oligodendroglial lineage
(Hsieh et al., 2004b). The function of IGF-I in oligodendrocyte differentiation is, at
least in part, attributable to inhibition of BMP signaling, which prevents NSCs from
­differentiating into oligodendrocytes.
3.3.2.2 Transcription Factors Regulating Oligodendrocyte Differentiation
The bHLH factors OLIG1 and OLIG2 are essential and sufficient for oligodendrocyte lineage specification (Ross et al., 2003; Sauvageot and Stiles, 2002). Compound
disruption of Olig1 and Olig2 resulted in a complete loss of the oligodendrocyte
lineage throughout the CNS (Zhou and Anderson, 2002). Disruption of Olig2 alone
is sufficient to completely inhibit oligodendrocyte development in the spinal cord;
however, localized clusters of early oligodendrocyte progenitors form in the ventral
forebrain, midbrain, diencephalon, cerebellum, and medulla of Olig2 null mice,
suggesting that Olig1 can partially compensate for loss of Olig2 in the developing
brain (Lu et al., 2002; Takebayashi et al., 2002).
Loss of Olig gene function in Olig1/2 double mutant mice also resulted in
­ectopic generation of astrocytes, and forced expression of Olig2 in progenitor cells
was sufficient to repress GFAP expression and inhibit astrocytic differentiation
(Gabay et al., 2003; Zhou and Anderson, 2002). OLIG2 has been shown to block
astrocytic differentiation in progenitor cells treated with cytokines, by sequestering

3  Fate Specification of Neural Stem Cells
IL-6 family
cytokine signals
P

NSCs
Proneural
bHLH proteins

STAT3

a

101

P300 /
CBP

P300 /
CBP

NEUROGENIN1
MASH1

Ubiquitous
bHLH proteins
E12
E47

OLIG1/2

P300 /
CBP

OLIG1/2

NSCs
Oligodendrocyte precursor cells

Ac

Neuronal differentiation

HDAC

Ac

Neuronal genes
genes
Neuronal

Oligodendrocyte

YY1

b

E-box

gfap gene

Astrocyte differentiation

P300/
CBP

tcf4, id4

YY1

STAT3

P300 /
CBP
P

tcf4, id4

Fig. 3.4  Mechanisms regulating oligodendrocyte differentiation. (a) bHLH proteins OLIG1 and
OLIG2 are major determinants of oligodendroglial fate. (See text for details.) (b) In proliferating
progenitors, transcriptional inhibitors (Id4, Tcf4) are expressed and inhibit myelin gene ­expression.
As the progenitors begin differentiation, HDAC1 is recruited to the promoters of these inhibitors
to form a repressive complex with YY1. The decreased levels of these inhibitory molecules allow
myelin gene expression to begin

the coactivator P300 from the astrogliogenic transcription factor STAT3 (Fig. 3.4a)
(Fukuda et al., 2004), through a mechanism reminiscent of the inhibition of astrogliogenesis by NGN1 (Sun et al., 2001). Astrocytic differentiation in the postnatal
telencephalon must thus require downregulation of Olig genes. This step may
involve BMPs, which are produced in the dorsal telencephalon and have been
shown to inhibit oligodendrogenesis in progenitor cultures, through induction of ID
proteins that inactivate OLIG proteins by dimerization (Samanta and Kessler, 2004;
Yung et  al., 2002). Another mechanism that may inactivate OLIG2 during astrocytic differentiation is its nuclear export, promoted by the serine/threonine protein
kinase Akt downstream of cytokine signaling (Setoguchi and Kondo, 2004).
The inhibition of neuronal differentiation by OLIG2 involves a competition with
NGN proteins for dimerization with E proteins and for binding to shared DNAbinding sites in the promoters of postmitotic motor neuron genes (Fig. 3.4) (Lee
et al., 2005). In the embryonic telencephalon, Olig2 is similarly expressed in ventral progenitors that generate both oligodendrocytes and neurons (Furusho et  al.,
2006; Takebayashi et al., 2000; Yung et al., 2002). However, the role of OLIG2 in
neuronal specification in the developmental telencephalon is less well characterized
and is probably less important than its role in oligodendrogenesis.

102

M. Namihira and K. Nakashima

Interestingly, OLIG2 is expressed in the early postnatal SVZ in both astrocytes
and oligodendrocytes, but not in neurons (Marshall et  al., 2005). OLIG2 is then
downregulated in mature astrocytes in the adult, but may be re-expressed by a
­fraction of astrocytes following brain injury (Buffo et al., 2005). Forced expression
of OLIG2 in SVZ progenitors induces both oligodendrocytes and astrocytes, while
dominant negative versions of the protein block the production of both cell types
and instead promote neurogenesis (Marshall et al., 2005). This astrogliogenic role
of OLIG2 in the postnatal brain may result in the generation of a distinct type of
astrocyte and represent a mechanism of specification different from that operating
for embryonic astrocytes, which, in contrast, require the downregulation of OLIG2
(Marshall et al., 2005).
Pharmacological inhibitors of HDACs prevent the expression of myelin genes
in vitro (Marin-Husstege et al., 2002) and developmental myelination in vivo (Shen
et al., 2005), suggesting that histone deacetylation is necessary for the initiation of
the transcriptional program leading to myelin gene expression. Recently, He et al.
screened the promoters of genes regulated by TSA, an inhibitor of HDAC activity
during oligodendrocyte differentiation, for the presence of common binding motifs
(He et  al., 2007). They found that the consensus sequence NNCCATNN (Yant
et al., 1995) for the transcription factor Yin Yang 1 (YY1) was present in the promoter region motifs of more than 30% of the genes downregulated by histone
deacetylation during oligodendrocyte differentiation (He et  al., 2007). YY1 is a
zinc finger protein with the ability to bind DNA (Seto et al., 1991) and functions as
a chromatin modifier (Thomas and Seto, 1999). The results of He et al. also indicate
that, at the molecular level, YY1 acts as a lineage-specific repressor of ­transcriptional
inhibitors for myelin gene expression (Tcf4 and Id4) by recruiting histone deacetylase-1 to their promoters during oligodendrocytic differentiation (Fig. 3.4b) (He
et al., 2007). Furthermore, conditional ablation of Yy1 in the oligodendrocyte lineage in  vivo induces a phenotype characterized by defective myelination, ataxia,
and tremor. At the cellular level, lack of Yy1 arrests differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitors after they exit from the cell cycle. This YY1-mediated repressive
event occurs only when progenitors differentiate into oligodendrocytes and not
when they become astrocytes. Collectively, their data showed that YY1 and HDACs
of its partner are the essential components of oligodendrocytic differentiation and
maturation in the developing mouse CNS (Fig. 3.4b) (He et al., 2007).

3.4 Closing Remarks
Fate specification in NSCs requires a multitude of tightly coordinated steps. In the
telencephalon of the developing mammalian brain, this is well illustrated by the
intricate coordination of the JAK-STAT pathway, which involves temporally
­regulated extracellular signals, autoregulatory loops controlling various ­components
of the signaling machinery, cross-talk with other gliogenic pathways at various
steps, and regulation of STAT1/3 transcription factor binding by modifications of

3  Fate Specification of Neural Stem Cells

103

both DNA and chromatin. By introducing the concept of epigenetics, we have
become able to provide mechanistic explanations for many biological phenomena
that formerly could only be described as cell context dependent. However, the
importance of histone modifications, DNA methylation, and ncRNAs in the selection of neuronal and glial fates, and the mechanisms involved, remain largely unexplored. Methods to identify and manipulate NSCs in vivo and in vitro are improving
rapidly, and these developments should ensure that our understanding of how neural cell fates are specified will progress rapidly as well.
In a recent series of studies, human fibroblasts were reprogrammed in vitro into
pluripotent stem cell-like cells [termed induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells] through
retroviral transduction of combinations of transcription factors (Takahashi et  al.,
2007; Park et al., 2008). One theme of future therapeutic applications stem cell technology will therefore be the development of robust and reliable differentiation protocols for human iPS cells. Because of their ability to self-renew and their remarkable
potential for differentiation into neural derivatives, NSCs hold great promise for
therapeutic applications in neurological dysfunctions such as Parkinson’s disease,
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and spinal cord injury (Lindvall and Kokaia, 2006;
Okano, 2002). Establishing methods for the generation of NSCs from human iPS
cells and understanding the basic mechanisms regulating fate specification of NSCs
will provide the foundation for cell replacement therapy using transplanted cells.
Acknowledgements  We thank Dr. Ian Smith for helpful comments and critical reading of the
manuscript. We are very grateful to M. Ueda for her excellent secretarial assistance.

References
Akazawa C, Sasai Y, Nakanishi S et al (1992) Molecular characterization of a rat negative regulator with a basic helix-loop-helix structure predominantly expressed in the developing nervous
system. J Biol Chem 267:21879–21885.
Andres ME, Burger C, Peral-Rubio MJ et al (1999) CoREST: a functional corepressor required
for regulation of neural-specific gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:9873–9878.
Ballas N, Mandel G (2005) The many faces of REST oversee epigenetic programming of neuronal
genes. Curr Opin Neurobiol 15:500–506.
Ballas N, Grunseich C, Lu DD et al (2005) REST and its corepressors mediate plasticity of neuronal gene chromatin throughout neurogenesis. Cell 121:645–657.
Battaglioli E, Andres ME, Rose DW et  al (2002) REST repression of neuronal genes requires
components of the hSWI.SNF complex. J Biol Chem 277:41038–41045.
Bertrand N, Castro DS, Guillemot F (2002) Proneural genes and the specification of neural cell
types. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:517–530.
Bonni A, Sun Y, Nadal-Vicens M et al (1997) Regulation of gliogenesis in the central nervous
system by the JAK-STAT signaling pathway. Science 278:477–483.
Buffo A, Vosko MR, Erturk D et al (2005) Expression pattern of the transcription factor Olig2 in
response to brain injuries: implications for neuronal repair. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
102:18183–18188.
Cameron HA, Woolley CS, McEwen BS et al (1993) Differentiation of newly born neurons and
glia in the dentate gyrus of the adult rat. Neuroscience 56:337–344.
Campbell K (2005) Cortical neuron specification: it has its time and place. Neuron 46:373–376.

104

M. Namihira and K. Nakashima

Cebolla B, Vallejo M (2006) Nuclear factor-I regulates glial fibrillary acidic protein gene expression
in astrocytes differentiated from cortical precursor cells. J Neurochem 97:1057–1070.
Chambers CB, Peng Y, Nguyen H et al (2001) Spatiotemporal selectivity of response to Notch1
signals in mammalian forebrain precursors. Development (Camb) 128:689–702.
Chen H, Thiagalingam A, Chopra H et al (1997) Conservation of the Drosophila lateral inhibition
pathway in human lung cancer: a hairy-related protein (HES-1) directly represses achaetescute homolog-1 expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:5355–5360.
Chong JA, Tapia-Ramirez J, Kim S et al (1995) REST: a mammalian silencer protein that restricts
sodium channel gene expression to neurons. Cell 80:949–957.
Christopherson KS, Ullian EM, Stokes CC et al (2005) Thrombospondins are astrocyte-secreted
proteins that promote CNS synaptogenesis. Cell 120:421–433.
Conaco C, Otto S, Han JJ et  al (2006) Reciprocal actions of REST and a microRNA promote
neuronal identity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:2422–2427.
das Neves L, Duchala CS, Tolentino-Silva F et al (1999) Disruption of the murine nuclear factor
I-A gene (Nfia) results in perinatal lethality, hydrocephalus, and agenesis of the corpus callosum.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:11946–11951.
de la Serna IL, Ohkawa Y, Imbalzano AN (2006) Chromatin remodelling in mammalian differentiation: lessons from ATP-dependent remodellers. Nat Rev Genet 7:461–473.
Deneen B, Ho R, Lukaszewicz A et al (2006) The transcription factor NFIA controls the onset of
gliogenesis in the developing spinal cord. Neuron 52:953–968.
Doetsch F (2003) The glial identity of neural stem cells. Nat Neurosci 6:1127–1134.
Elson GC, Lelievre E, Guillet C et al (2000) CLF associates with CLC to form a functional heteromeric ligand for the CNTF receptor complex. Nat Neurosci 3:867–872.
Fan G, Martinowich K, Chin MH et al (2005) DNA methylation controls the timing of astrogliogenesis through regulation of JAK-STAT signaling. Development (Camb) 132:3345–3356.
Fukuda S, Kondo T, Takebayashi H et al (2004) Negative regulatory effect of an oligodendrocytic
bHLH factor OLIG2 on the astrocytic differentiation pathway. Cell Death Differ 11:196–202.
Furukawa T, Mukherjee S, Bao ZZ et al (2000) rax, Hes1, and notch1 promote the formation of
Muller glia by postnatal retinal progenitor cells. Neuron 26:383–394.
Furusho M, Ono K, Takebayashi H et al (2006) Involvement of the Olig2 transcription factor in
cholinergic neuron development of the basal forebrain. Dev Biol 293:348–357.
Gabay L, Lowell S, Rubin LL et al (2003) Deregulation of dorsoventral patterning by FGF confers
trilineage differentiation capacity on CNS stem cells in vitro. Neuron 40:485–499.
Gage FH (2000) Mammalian neural stem cells. Science 287:1433–1438.
Gage FH, Kempermann G, Palmer TD et al (1998) Multipotent progenitor cells in the adult dentate gyrus. J Neurobiol 36:249–266.
Garcia-Verdugo JM, Doetsch F, Wichterle H et al (1998) Architecture and cell types of the adult
subventricular zone: in search of the stem cells. J Neurobiol 36:234–248.
Ge W, Martinowich K, Wu X et al (2002) Notch signaling promotes astrogliogenesis via direct
CSL-mediated glial gene activation. J Neurosci Res 69:848–860.
Grandbarbe L, Bouissac J, Rand M et al (2003) Delta-Notch signaling controls the generation of neurons/glia from neural stem cells in a stepwise process. Development (Camb) 130:1391–1402.
Gronostajski RM (2000) Roles of the NFI/CTF gene family in transcription and development.
Gene (Amst) 249:31–45.
Gross RE, Mehler MF, Mabie PC et  al (1996) Bone morphogenetic proteins promote astroglial
lineage commitment by mammalian subventricular zone progenitor cells. Neuron 17:595–606.
He F, Ge W, Martinowich K et al (2005) A positive autoregulatory loop of Jak-STAT signaling
controls the onset of astrogliogenesis. Nat Neurosci 8:616–625.
He Y, Dupree J, Wang J et al (2007) The transcription factor Yin Yang 1 is essential for oligodendrocyte progenitor differentiation. Neuron 55:217–230.
Hermanson O, Jepsen K, Rosenfeld MG (2002) N-CoR controls differentiation of neural stem
cells into astrocytes. Nature (Lond) 419:934–939.
Hirabayashi Y, Itoh Y, Tabata H et  al (2004) The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway directs neuronal
differentiation of cortical neural precursor cells. Development (Camb) 131:2791–2801.

3  Fate Specification of Neural Stem Cells

105

Hsieh J, Gage FH (2004) Epigenetic control of neural stem cell fate. Curr Opin Genet Dev
14:461–469.
Hsieh J, Nakashima K, Kuwabara T et al (2004a) Histone deacetylase inhibition-mediated neuronal differentiation of multipotent adult neural progenitor cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
101:16659–16664.
Hsieh J, Aimone JB, Kaspar BK et al (2004b) IGF-I instructs multipotent adult neural progenitor
cells to become oligodendrocytes. J Cell Biol 164:111–122.
Israsena N, Hu M, Fu W et al (2004) The presence of FGF2 signaling determines whether betacatenin exerts effects on proliferation or neuronal differentiation of neural stem cells. Dev Biol
268:220–231.
Jackson EL, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Gil-Perotin S et  al (2006) PDGFR alpha-positive B cells are
neural stem cells in the adult SVZ that form glioma-like growths in response to increased
PDGF signaling. Neuron 51:187–199.
Kettenmann H, Ransom BR (1988) Electrical coupling between astrocytes and between oligodendrocytes studied in mammalian cell cultures. Glia 1:64–73.
Kohyama J, Tokunaga A, Fujita Y et  al (2005) Visualization of spatiotemporal activation of
Notch signaling: live monitoring and significance in neural development. Dev Biol
286:311–325.
Kuwabara T, Hsieh J, Nakashima K et al (2004) A small modulatory dsRNA specifies the fate of
adult neural stem cells. Cell 116:779–793.
Ledent V, Paquet O, Vervoort M (2002) Phylogenetic analysis of the human basic helix-loop-helix
proteins. Genome Biol 3:RESEARCH0030.
Lee JC, Mayer-Proschel M, Rao MS (2000) Gliogenesis in the central nervous system. Glia
30:105–121.
Lee SK, Lee B, Ruiz EC et al (2005) Olig2 and Ngn2 function in opposition to modulate gene
expression in motor neuron progenitor cells. Genes Dev 19:282–294.
Lelievre E, Plun-Favreau H, Chevalier S et  al (2001) Signaling pathways recruited by the cardiotrophin-like cytokine/cytokine-like factor-1 composite cytokine: specific requirement of the
membrane-bound form of ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor alpha component. J Biol Chem
276:22476–22484.
Lessard J, Wu JI, Ranish JA et al (2007) An essential switch in subunit composition of a chromatin
remodeling complex during neural development. Neuron 55:201–215.
Li W, Cogswell CA, LoTurco JJ (1998) Neuronal differentiation of precursors in the neocortical
ventricular zone is triggered by BMP. J Neurosci 18:8853–8862.
Lim DA, Tramontin AD, Trevejo JM et al (2000) Noggin antagonizes BMP signaling to create a
niche for adult neurogenesis. Neuron 28:713–726.
Lindvall O, Kokaia Z (2006) Stem cells for the treatment of neurological disorders. Nature
441:1094–1096.
Lu QR, Yuk D, Alberta JA et al (2000) Sonic hedgehog-regulated oligodendrocyte lineage genes
encoding bHLH proteins in the mammalian central nervous system. Neuron 25:317–329.
Lu QR, Sun T, Zhu Z et al (2002) Common developmental requirement for Olig function indicates
a motor neuron/oligodendrocyte connection. Cell 109:75–86.
Machon O, van den Bout CJ, Backman M et al (2003) Role of beta-catenin in the developing cortical and hippocampal neuroepithelium. Neuroscience 122:129–143.
Marin-Husstege M, Muggironi M, Liu A et al (2002) Histone deacetylase activity is necessary for
oligodendrocyte lineage progression. J Neurosci 22:10333–10345.
Marshall CA, Novitch BG, Goldman JE (2005) Olig2 directs astrocyte and oligodendrocyte formation in postnatal subventricular zone cells. J Neurosci 25:7289–7298.
Ming GL, Song H (2005) Adult neurogenesis in the mammalian central nervous system. Annu
Rev Neurosci 28:223–250.
Molofsky AV, Pardal R, Morrison SJ (2004) Diverse mechanisms regulate stem cell self-renewal.
Curr Opin Cell Biol 16:700–707.
Moore KB, Schneider ML, Vetter ML (2002) Posttranslational mechanisms control the timing of
bHLH function and regulate retinal cell fate. Neuron 34:183–195.

106

M. Namihira and K. Nakashima

Morrison SJ, Perez SE, Qiao Z et  al (2000) Transient Notch activation initiates an irreversible
switch from neurogenesis to gliogenesis by neural crest stem cells. Cell 101:499–510.
Muroyama Y, Fujiwara Y, Orkin SH et al (2005) Specification of astrocytes by bHLH protein SCL
in a restricted region of the neural tube. Nature 438:360–363.
Murre C, McCaw PS, Vaessin H et al (1989) Interactions between heterologous helix-loop-helix
proteins generate complexes that bind specifically to a common DNA sequence. Cell
58:537–544.
Nakashima K, Yanagisawa M, Arakawa et al (1999) Synergistic signaling in fetal brain by STAT3Smad1 complex bridged by p300. Science 284:479–482.
Nakashima K, Takizawa T, Ochiai W et al (2001) BMP2-mediated alteration in the developmental
pathway of fetal mouse brain cells from neurogenesis to astrocytogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 98:5868–5873.
Namihira M, Nakashima K, Taga T (2004) Developmental stage dependent regulation of DNA
methylation and chromatin modification in a immature astrocyte specific gene promoter. FEBS
Lett 572:184–188.
Nery S, Wichterle H, Fishell G (2001) Sonic hedgehog contributes to oligodendrocyte specification in the mammalian forebrain. Development 128:527–540.
Noctor SC, Martinez-Cerdeno V, Ivic L et  al (2004) Cortical neurons arise in symmetric and
asymmetric division zones and migrate through specific phases. Nat Neurosci 7:136–144.
Norton JD, Deed RW, Craggs G et al (1998) Id helix-loop-helix proteins in cell growth and differentiation. Trends Cell Biol 8:58–65.
Ohtsuka T, Ishibashi M, Gradwohl G et al (1999) Hes1 and Hes5 as notch effectors in mammalian
neuronal differentiation. EMBO J 18:2196–2207.
Okano H (2002) Stem cell biology of the central nervous system. J Neurosci Res 69:698–707.
Park IH, Zhao R, West JA et al (2008) Reprogramming of human somatic cells to pluripotency
with defined factors. Nature 451:141–146.
Pringle NP, Guthrie S, Lumsden A et  al (1998) Dorsal spinal cord neuroepithelium generates
astrocytes but not oligodendrocytes. Neuron 20:883–893.
Qian X, Shen Q, Goderie SK et al (2000) Timing of CNS cell generation: a programmed sequence
of neuron and glial cell production from isolated murine cortical stem cells. Neuron 28:69–80.
Robertson KD, Jones PA (2000) DNA methylation: past, present and future directions.
Carcinogenesis 21:461–467.
Roopra A, Sharling L, Wood IC et al (2000) Transcriptional repression by neuron-restrictive silencer
factor is mediated via the Sin3-histone deacetylase complex. Mol Cell Biol 20:2147–2157.
Ross SE, Greenberg ME, Stiles CD (2003) Basic helix-loop-helix factors in cortical development.
Neuron 39:13–25.
Samanta J, Kessler JA (2004) Interactions between ID and OLIG proteins mediate the inhibitory
effects of BMP4 on oligodendroglial differentiation. Development 131:4131–4142.
Sauvageot CM, Stiles CD (2002) Molecular mechanisms controlling cortical gliogenesis. Curr
Opin Neurobiol 12:244–249.
Schoenherr CJ, Anderson DJ (1995) The neuron-restrictive silencer factor (NRSF): a coordinate
repressor of multiple neuron-specific genes. Science 267:1360–1363.
Schoenherr CJ, Paquette AJ, Anderson DJ (1996) Identification of potential target genes for the
neuron-restrictive silencer factor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:9881–9886.
Seo S, Herr A, Lim JW et al (2005) Geminin regulates neuronal differentiation by antagonizing
Brg1 activity. Genes Dev 19:1723–1734.
Seto E, Shi Y, Shenk T (1991) YY1 is an initiator sequence-binding protein that directs and activates transcription in vitro. Nature 354:241–245.
Setoguchi T, Kondo T (2004) Nuclear export of OLIG2 in neural stem cells is essential for ciliary
neurotrophic factor-induced astrocyte differentiation. J Cell Biol 166:963–968.
Shen S, Li J, Casaccia-Bonnefil P (2005) Histone modifications affect timing of oligodendrocyte
progenitor differentiation in the developing rat brain. J Cell Biol 169:577–589.
Shu T, Butz KG, Plachez C et  al (2003) Abnormal development of forebrain midline glia and
commissural projections in Nfia knock-out mice. J Neurosci 23:203–212.

3  Fate Specification of Neural Stem Cells

107

Song MR, Ghosh A (2004) FGF2-induced chromatin remodeling regulates CNTF-mediated gene
expression and astrocyte differentiation. Nat Neurosci 7:229–235.
Steele-Perkins G, Plachez C, Butz KG et al (2005) The transcription factor gene Nfib is essential
for both lung maturation and brain development. Mol Cell Biol 25:685–698.
Stolt CC, Lommes P, Sock E et  al (2003) The Sox9 transcription factor determines glial fate
choice in the developing spinal cord. Genes Dev 17:1677–1689.
Sun Y, Nadal-Vicens M, Misono S et al (2001) Neurogenin promotes neurogenesis and inhibits
glial differentiation by independent mechanisms. Cell 104:365–376.
Taga T, Kishimoto T (1997) Gp130 and the interleukin-6 family of cytokines. Annu Rev Immunol
15:797–819.
Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M et  al (2007) Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult
human fibroblasts by defined factors. Cell 131:861–872.
Takebayashi H, Yoshida S, Sugimori M et al (2000) Dynamic expression of basic helix-loop-helix
Olig family members: implication of Olig2 in neuron and oligodendrocyte differentiation and
identification of a new member, Olig3. Mech Dev 99:143–148.
Takebayashi H, Nabeshima Y, Yoshida S et al (2002) The basic helix-loop-helix factor olig2 is
essential for the development of motoneuron and oligodendrocyte lineages. Curr Biol
12:1157–1163.
Takizawa T, Nakashima K, Namihira M et al (2001) DNA methylation is a critical cell-intrinsic
determinant of astrocyte differentiation in the fetal brain. Dev Cell 1:749–758.
Takizawa T, Ochiai W, Nakashima K et al (2003) Enhanced gene activation by Notch and BMP
signaling cross-talk. Nucleic Acids Res 31:5723–5731.
Tanigaki K, Nogaki F, Takahashi J et al (2001) Notch1 and Notch3 instructively restrict bFGFresponsive multipotent neural progenitor cells to an astroglial fate. Neuron 29:45–55.
Temple S (2001) The development of neural stem cells. Nature 414:112–117.
Thomas MJ, Seto E (1999) Unlocking the mechanisms of transcription factor YY1: are chromatin
modifying enzymes the key? Gene 236:197–208.
Tokunaga A, Kohyama J, Yoshida T et  al (2004) Mapping spatio-temporal activation of Notch
signaling during neurogenesis and gliogenesis in the developing mouse brain. J Neurochem
90:142–154.
Vinals F, Reiriz J, Ambrosio S et al (2004) BMP-2 decreases Mash1 stability by increasing Id1
expression. EMBO J 23:3527–3537.
Wrana JL (2000) Regulation of Smad activity. Cell 100:189–192.
Yant SR, Zhu W, Millinoff D et al (1995) High affinity YY1 binding motifs: identification of two
core types (ACAT and CCAT) and distribution of potential binding sites within the human beta
globin cluster. Nucleic Acids Res 23:4353–4362.
Yoder JA, Walsh CP, Bestor TH (1997) Cytosine methylation and the ecology of intragenomic
parasites. Trends Genet 13:335–340.
Yung SY, Gokhan S, Jurcsak J et al (2002) Differential modulation of BMP signaling promotes
the elaboration of cerebral cortical GABAergic neurons or oligodendrocytes from a common
sonic hedgehog-responsive ventral forebrain progenitor species. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
99:16273–16278.
Zhou Q, Anderson DJ (2002) The bHLH transcription factors OLIG2 and OLIG1 couple neuronal
and glial subtype specification. Cell 109:61–73.
Zhou Q, Wang S, Anderson DJ (2000) Identification of a novel family of oligodendrocyte lineagespecific basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors. Neuron 25:331–343.

Chapter 4

Fractones: Home and Conductors
of the Neural Stem Cell Niche
Frederic Mercier, Jason Schnack, and Maureen Saint Georges Chaumet

Abstract  Throughout life, neural stem cells proliferate and differentiate in restricted
zones of the brain, termed niches, to produce new neurons and glial cells. In these
niches, growth factors and extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules determine the
fate of neural stem and progenitor cells (NSPC). However, the precise compounds
and the mechanisms that regulate growth factors and other signaling molecules
in the niches are unknown. Based on the evidence that NSPCs proliferate next to
blood vessels in the dentate gyrus, the concept of a vascular niche for neurogenesis
has been initially proposed. In the subventricular zone of the lateral ventricle, the
most neurogenic zone in adulthood, we have found that NSPC directly contact
a novel type of ECM structure that we have named fractones. Fractones contain
heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPG) that collect and concentrate the neurogenic
growth factor FGF2 at the NSPC surface and likely direct its signaling via tyrosine
kinase receptors. Our preliminary results indicate that FGF2 binding to fractoneHSPG is essential for activating FGF2 at the NSPC surface. Moreover, we have
found fractones express diverse HSPG at the surface of proliferating NSPC during
development, even before the brain vasculature emerges. Therefore, fractones hold
considerable promise for promoting growth factors at the stem cell surface to ultimately regulate neurogenesis during development and adulthood.

4.1 Introduction to the Concept of the Neural Stem Cell Niche
Neural stem cells proliferate and differentiate to produce new neurons and glial
cells in restricted zones of the adult brain: the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the
lateral ventricle, the rostral migratory streams (RMS), the subcallosum zone (SCZ),
the olfactory bulb (OB), and the granular layer of the dentate gyrus (DG) (Altman,

F. Mercier (*), J. Schnack, and M.S.G. Chaumet
Department of Tropical Medicine, Medical Microbiology and Pharmacology, John A,
Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA
e-mail: fmercier@pbrc.hawaii.edu

T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_4, © Springer 2011

109

110

F. Mercier et al.

1963, 1969; Altman and Das, 1966; Alvarez-Buylla and Nottebohm, 1988; Seki
and Array, 1993; Lois and Alvarez-Buylla, 1994; Doetsch and Alvarez-Buylla,
1996; Seri et al., 2006). In these biological niches, regulation of neural stem and
progenitor cell (NSPC) proliferation and differentiation is influenced by growth factors (Palmer et al., 1995; Kuhn et  al., 1997; Pencea et  al., 2001; Falk and Frisen,
2002; Hienola et al., 2004). However, the physiological mechanism that regulates
these growth factors, and therefore NSPC fate, is unknown.
In 2000, Palmer et al. proposed the concept of a vascular niche for neural stem
cells, based on the evidence of immediate anatomical associations between proliferating NSPC and blood vessels in the hippocampus. Since their discovery, the
authors have focused on the molecular and inflammatory aspects of the niche
(Monje et  al., 2003; Wexler et  al., 2007) without identifying the anatomical and
functional vascular elements that serve as a niche for NSPC. Exploring the cellular
interactions of the niche (Wurmser et al., 2004) and the extracellular structures that
house and that administer growth factors to NSPC is crucial to understanding their
proliferation and differentiation in the adult brain.

4.2 The Discovery of Fractones
We recently characterized novel electron-dense structures by transmission electron
microscopy in the SVZ of the adult rat (Mercier et al., 2002, 2003). These structures are extracellular, regularly arranged along the ventricle wall, and localized
in between the converging processes of NSPC, astrocytes, ependymocytes, and
macrophages. Based on their fractal geometry, and in reference to the concept of
fractals (Mandelbrot, 1983), these structures have been termed fractones (Mercier
et al., 2002). Fractones are small in size (2–5 mm), but their branched morphology
allows each fractone to directly contact numerous NSPC and other cells of the
ventricle wall (Fig.  4.1a,b; see Fig.  4.6c). By their electron density, fractones
resemble basement membranes (basal laminae). Supporting fractone affiliation
with basement membranes, we found anatomical connections between fractones
and perivascular basement membranes, via elongated projections of electron-dense
material, also resembling basement membranes (Mercier et  al., 2002, 2003).
However, fractones have a unique morphology, and are made of connected fragments that are much thicker (200–300 mm; Fig. 4.1b) than basement membranes,
and their arrangement, as a series in the SVZ, is not typical of the conventional
sheet-like subepithelial basement membranes (Yurchenko and Schittny, 1990).
After immunolabeling, fractones can be visualized by fluorescence microscopy
(Fig. 4.2). Laminin was first used as a marker of fractones (Mercier et al., 2002).
Laminin is a basic component of basement membranes and forms, with collagen IV,
nidogen, and heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPG), a functional lattice of the
extracellular matrix (ECM) (Yurchenko and Schyttny, 1990) that intervenes in morphogenesis, cell proliferation, and diverse plasticity processes through organs
and tissues of the body (Aviezer et al., 1994; Bernfield et al., 1994; Halfter, 1998;
Iozzo, 2005). Immunolabeling with antibody for laminin revealed (laminin+)

4  Fractones: Home and Conductors of the Neural Stem Cell Niche

111

Fig. 4.1  Fractone ultrastructure. Lateral ventricle wall of the adult rat. (a) Ultrastructure of the
ventricle wall, comprising ependyma (Ep) and subventricular zone (SVZ). A fractone is visible at
the ependyma/SVZ interface (arrow). VC ventricular cavity. (b) Detail of a fractone, visualized as
a thick electron-dense extracellular material (arrow), with a fractal morphology. Arrowheads,
plasma membrane of cell processes converging toward the fractone. Bars (a) 3 mm; (b) 1 mm

puncta along the luminal side of the vimentin-positive ependyma in the adult rat,
mouse, and human (Mercier et al., 2002; Kerever et al., 2007). The characterization
of fractones as laminin+ basement membrane (BM) structures of similar location,
distribution, size, and quantity strongly supported the view that the fractones
characterized by electron microscopy appear as small puncta by fluorescence
microscopy (Mercier and Hatton, 2000). Correlation between the number of fractones visualized by electron microscopy and the number of laminin+ puncta indi-

112

F. Mercier et al.

Fig. 4.2  Neural stem and progenitor cells (NSPC) proliferate next to fractones during development
and adulthood: adult mouse (a, b) and mouse in development (c). (a) After immunolabel for
laminin (green), fractones appear as puncta (arrow) in tangential view of the anterior subventricular
zone (SVZa), the most active neurogenic zone during adulthood (the SVZa location is indicated
by an arrow in the inset). The ventricular cavity is not visible in tangential views of the ventricle
wall. Proliferating NSPC, visualized by immunolabel for bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU, marker of
S-phase mitosis, red) 3 h after a single injection of BrdU, are located next to fractones (arrow).
(b) Double immunolabel for heparan sulfate proteoglycan (green) and BrdU (red), respectively,
showing fractones and proliferating NSPC and their association in the SVZ (arrow). CP, choroid
plexus. (c) Neuroepithelial cells proliferate next to fractones during early morphogenesis (E11.5
stage). Double immunolabel for laminin (blue) and phosphorylated histone 3 (PH3, marker of
M-phase mitosis, red), respectively, shows fractones and small clusters of cells (arrow) that have
undergone mitosis. VC, ventricular cavity. Bars (a and b) 50 mm; (c) 100 mm

4  Fractones: Home and Conductors of the Neural Stem Cell Niche

113

cate that all fractones contain laminin. Laminin immunolabel also reveals the
meninges, choroid plexus, and the brain blood vessels (Fig. 4.2b), which contain
laminin in their basement membranes (Mercier and Hatton, 2000, 2001). The laminin+ puncta of the SVZ are unambiguously distinguished from local capillaries by
size, shape, and location. First, the distribution of laminin+ puncta does not suggest
a vasculature arrangement (Fig. 4.2a). Second, laminin+ puncta are smaller in size
than the smallest capillaries, which are at least 6 mm in diameter (Fig. 4.2a). Third,
laminin+ puncta are seen in a single confocal plane whereas the longitudinal axis
of capillaries can be followed in the depth of the 25-mm-thick sections.

4.3 Fractone Composition and Distribution in the Adult Brain
Theorizing that fractones represent a form of ECM similar to basement membranes,
we investigated fractone components by double immunolabel, using laminin as
the reference marker and basement membrane-specific markers on brain frozen
sections. We found that all fractones are immunoreactive for the basement membrane components collagen IV, b- and g-isoforms of laminin, nidogen, and heparan
sulfate proteoglycans (HSPG) (Kerever et  al., 2007). Most fractones expressed
perlecan, a major HSPG that promotes heparin-binding growth factor activity
(Aviezer et al., 1994). In the SVZ of the lateral ventricle, a prime neurogenic zone,
several fractones were immunoreactive for collagen I (Mercier et al., 2002).
Using laminin or collagen IV immunolabel in serial sections of the whole
brain, we found fractones in the SVZ of the whole ventricular system, that is, the
lateral ventricle, third ventricle, fourth ventricle, aqueduct of Sylvius, and the
spinal canal, in the adult mouse, rat, and human (Mercier et  al., 2002, 2003;
Kerever et al., 2007). The SVZ of the lateral ventricle, which houses numerous
NSPC (Doetsch et al., 1997), is the most neurogenic zone in the adult brain. The
SVZ of the other ventricles and spinal cord contain NSPC that produce neurons
and glial cells when artificially stimulated by growth factors (Pencea et  al.,
2001) or in vitro conditions (Weiss et al., 1996). Fractones were not present in
the other adult neurogenic zones, that is, in the OB, SCZ, RMS, and DG; those
zones lacking ventricles or ventricular extensions in adulthood, therefore, do not
possess a SVZ.

4.4 A Highly Organized Fractone and Vascular
Niche for Neurogenesis
We used immunolabel for bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU), a marker of DNA incorporation that localizes proliferating cells in S phase, on complete serial sections
of the whole brain in adult mice that survived 3 or 6 h after intraperitoneal injection of BrdU to map the neurogenic niches (Saint Georges Chaumet et al., 2008).

114

F. Mercier et al.

In 3 or 6  h, the BrdU-incorporating cells did not have time to significantly
migrate and were visualized at the sites of mitosis initiation. We confirmed the
existence of a neurogenic niche in the OB, RMS, SVZ of the lateral ventricle,
SCZ, and DG, and found no other sites of cell proliferation in the brain parenchyma. The continuum of BrdU+ cells between OB, RMS, SVZ, and SCZ can be
interpreted as a single neurogenic niche, centered on the SVZ of the lateral

Fig.  4.3  Maps of the neurogenic niche in the adult mouse brain. (a) Sagittal view shows the
neurogenic niche (white) in the olfactory bulb (OB), rostral migratory stream (RMS), SVZ of the
anterior aspect of the lateral ventricle (SVZa), subcallosum zone (SCZ), and dentate gyrus (DG).
(b) Coronal view of the neurogenic niche shows the long extensions of the SCZ (arrow).
(c) Proportions of vascular versus fractone niche in the adult mouse brain (“pie chart,” upper left).
The table (upper right) indicates the number of cells immunoreactive for BrdU, 3 h after injection
of BrdU, in the different portions of the neurogenic niche. A three-dimensional graphic (bottom)
illustrates the organization (sagittal plan) of the neurogenic niche (gray) in one brain hemisphere.
The choroid plexus of the lateral ventricle is indicated by White color

4  Fractones: Home and Conductors of the Neural Stem Cell Niche

115

ventricle and dually represented in the left and right hemispheres (Saint Georges
Chaumet et al., 2008). The graphics in Fig. 4.3a,c show the anterior portion of the
lateral ventricle SVZ (SVZa), which comprises the highest number of proliferating
cells in brain, a zone that protrudes from the caudate putamen in the anterior
aspect of the lateral ventricle. The RMS, which is also highly neurogenic, is
attached to the most anterior extremity of this neurogenic center and is attached
to the OB neurogenic zones. Moreover, both posterior aspects of the lateral
ventricle (SVZp) and the SCZ are attached to the SVZa. An overview of the
neurogenic niche is illustrated in Fig.  4.3a,b (two-dimensional sagittal and
coronal representations) and Fig.  4.3c (three-dimensional representation). All
BrdU-incorporating cells in the brain parenchyma (excluding meningeal and
vascular cells) were counted throughout the brain (Fig. 4.3c). The anterior aspect
of the SVZ lateral ventricle, RMS, SCZ, and OB harbored 96.5% of the total
number of BrdU-incorporating cells (Saint Georges Chaumet et  al., 2008). DG
(3%) is apparently disconnected from the main neurogenic centers of the brain,
but all are linked to the lamina affixa, a meningeal projection that courses beneath
the hippocampus (see Fig. 4.2). Although very restricted in volume, the neurogenic niches form a sheet-like surface that traverses most of the brain from its
anterior (OB) to the very lateral portions of the brain via the external capsule and
the lateral ventricle (Fig. 4.3b). The anatomy and vascular identity of these niches
can be explained by the retraction during development and postnatal life of ventricles between the lateral ventricles and the OB, as well as underneath the
corpus callosum. That each of these niches displays different neurogenic abilities suggests that between these neurogenic niches small differences exist in their
composition. These differences may arise as a result of anatomical differences
and the availability of BM structures, the fractone or vascular niche, or through
the cocktail of available soluble factors. Perhaps the distribution of the neurogenic niche throughout the brain minimizes the migratory paths required for new
neurons and glial cells to reach their final destination. Anatomically, either
directly or via meningeal extensions, the neurogenic zones are interconnected,
but what are the specific cues and the physiological organization that control cell
proliferation and differentiation in the various NSC niches?

Table 4.1  Basal lamina heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPG) (180–467 kDa)
Embryonic
Name
Adult SVZ
Sources
(E12.5)
Sources
a
Perlecan
++++
Fractone  /BV/
++++
Fractone a/BV/
meninges
meninges
Agrin
?
?
++
Fractone a/meninges
Collagen XV
?
?
?
?
Collagen XVIII
?
?
++++
Fractone a/meninges
SVZ, subventricular zone; BV, blood vessels
 Fractone expression of HSPG is heterogeneous

a 

116

F. Mercier et al.

4.5 Extracellular Matrix and Basement Membranes
The extracellular matrix (ECM) consists of diverse constitutive, functional, and
interactive extracellular molecules in all tissues and organs. Although the functions
of ECM molecules such as collagens, laminins, fibronectin, HSPGs, and metalloproteinases are not well known in the brain, they participate at virtually all levels
of neural tissue functions, providing structural and homeostatic cues. In the brain,
ECM molecules are particularly concentrated in the meninges, in the meningeal
projections at the interface between brain substructures, in the vasculature, and at
the interface of all of these structures with the glia limitans (Mercier et al., 2003;
Mercier and Hatton, 2004; Mercier, 2004).
There are a variety of ECM molecules that protect or degrade, focally concentrate, and activate cytogenic growth factors (GFs) and cytokines. These ECM molecules are based at the cell surface or in restricted locations where they are
organized as a specialized dense meshwork termed basement membranes (BMs) or
basal laminae. It has been shown that ECM molecules contained in BMs and the
GFs that are trapped in (or bound to) these BMs are powerful modulators of the
interactions that lead to cell proliferation, differentiation, and morphogenesis
(Gordon et al., 1987; Roberts et al., 1988).

4.6 Dynamics of Niche-Specific Heparan Sulfate Interactions
4.6.1 Neurogenic Growth Factors Are Heparin-Binding
Molecules
It is significant that numerous neurogenic GFs are heparin-binding molecules.
As potent regulators of most niches with multiple feedback mechanisms and levels
of control, incorporation of HSPG into endogenous signaling pathways is a logical
safeguard against overexpression and exacerbation of cellular response. For these
reasons, HSPG are a focus of much attention in oncogenesis (Vlodavsky et  al.,
1990) while interest within the field of neurogenesis has only just begun.
The specific interactions of HSPG and individual GF is highly dependent upon
the endogenous HS and the available receptors within the neurogenic niche. The various effects of numerous growth factors that have been determined to require HS to
signal participate in a variety of processes from initiation of mitosis, guidance of
differentiation, and chemotaxis within the neurogenic niches are summarized in
Table  4.2 (Ornitz et  al., 1992; Hienola et  al., 2006). Fibroblast growth factor 2
(FGF2), the most commonly investigated neurogenic factor, is produced by the
choroid plexus, meningeal cells, and astrocytes within the brain and requires HS to
bind to its receptor (Guimond et al., 1993; Stopa et al., 2001; Proia et al., 2008)
Endogenous sources of the HB growth factors amphiregulin and transforming
growth factor-a (TGF-a) have been localized to the neurogenic zones as well as

4  Fractones: Home and Conductors of the Neural Stem Cell Niche

117

Table 4.2  Neurogenic heparin-binding growth factors
Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family
FGF 1–23
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) family
HB_EGF, amphiregulin, TNF-a
Nerve growth factor (NGF) family
BDNF, heparin-binding growthassociated molecule (HBGAM)
Morphogens
Wnts (1–15), Notch, ShH (1–2)

Hematopoietic factors
PDGF (AA, BB), GMCSF, platelet factor 4,
antithrombin 3
Angiogenic factors
VEGF (1,2), endostatin, endoreppelin
Inflammatory factors
TGF-b (1,2), BMP (2,4), interferon-g, Noggin,
Chordin IL-(1b, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 12)

their common receptor (Craig et al., 1996; Falk and Frisen, 2002). Providing additional credence to the numerous models of injury, ischemia and inflammatory
models of neurogenesis HS is also a mediator of a number of key inflammatory
growth factors and cytokines. A large majority of the TGF-b family and pathways
contain HB-factors. TGF-b, a negative modulator of neurogenesis, not only binds
to HS but alters its expression in the ECM (Rider, 2006). Bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP)-2 and -4 require HS for signaling while their antagonists noggin and
chordin require HS to inhibit BMP, suggesting the possibility of a complex feedback network involving these factors (Lim et al., 2000; Paine-Saunders et al., 2002;
Jasuja et al., 2004). Interferon-g demonstrates increased neurogenesis as a result of
introduction to NSC populations (Kim et al., 2007). Neurogenesis is a complicated
assortment of cellular behaviors that are influenced by a large number of overlapping paracrine factors, most of which rely upon HSPG to coordinate their action
within the brain. Unraveling the mystery of the neural stem cell must first begin
with discovering the parties involved.
4.6.1.1 Heparan Sulfate Proteoglycans and the Neural Stem cell Niche
HSPG are endogenous molecules of the ECM that interact with paracrine factors
via the negatively charged sulfate groups along the HS side chains. They exist as
part of the larger glucosaminoglycan (GAG) family that includes keratin sulfate,
chondroitin sulfate, dermatin sulfate, and the closest relative of heparan sulfate,
heparin. A single HSPG is composed of a single core protein and multiple HS side
chain attached at serine residues (Stringer and Gallagher, 1997). HSPG expression
and localization in the ECM are determined by the expression of the core protein
itself and its interactions with the plasma membrane and other ECM molecules.
HS is composed of a single chain of glucosamine a1,4-glucuronic acid that span
50–200 disaccharides in length and has alternating N-acetylated and N-sulfated glucosamine regions (Fig. 4.4; Bernfield et al., 1999). The sulfated domains, s-domains,
are produced during synthesis by deacetylase/sulfotransferase activity and display
large heterogeneity of size and dispersion between individual chains and along the
same chain (Unger et  al., 1991). The N-sulfated s-domains are the regions where

118

F. Mercier et al.

Fig. 4.4  Biochemical structure of heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) and its HS (GAG) side
chains. (a) Superstructure of general HSPG with core protein (black) and HS side chains.
(b) Expanded insert of a single HS from HSPG in (a) showing unbranched GAG chain. Highly
sulfated domains of N-sulfated glucosamine (gray) are dispersed along the chain by a-domains
and are the location for growth factor (GF) interactions. (c) Biochemical characterization of HS
disaccharides within HS. a-domains are composed of N-acetyl glucosamine a1-4 glucuronic acid;
s-domains are composed of N-sulfated glucosamine a1-4 hexonuric acids. Additional variable
sulfation within s-domains (O-sulfation) is denoted by “R”

substrates are bound and are also subject to the modification by sulfotransferases and
glucoisomerase to increase the substrate specificity and determine the function of the
molecule (Stringer and Gallagher, 1997). The charge repulsion from adjacent sulfate

4  Fractones: Home and Conductors of the Neural Stem Cell Niche

119

groups induces a more rigid form to the s-domains as opposed to the acetylated
a-domains, leading to a flexible linear chain with multiple straight regions (Mulloy
et al., 1994). As the s-domains are responsible for substrate binding, the entire chain
behaves like a number of “sticky rods” linked by flexible chains.
4.6.1.2 Hypervariability of HS and Complex Formation
HS is required for a large number of growth factors and cytokines to form a receptor
complex and induce signaling pathways (Gallagher, 2001). The s-domains find
positively charged regions on the substrate molecules to facilitate signaling or provide
safe haven for the substrate (Saksela et al., 1988). However, not all HS recognize
all heparin-binding substrates. Two single HS chains may vary in terms of overall
chain length, size, and dispersion of s-domains, and within the s-domains the locations of additional O-sulfation and of glucuronic to iduronic acid epimerization.
Most modifications occur within the s-domains with the very rare 3-O-sulfation of
an a-domain (Stringer et al., 1997). The structure of HS is such that in a single short
chain segment of eight disaccharides has more than 1 million possible structures by
altering the sulfation and epimerization.
The sulfation pattern of the s-domains creates a charge topography that determines substrate specificity. The highly variable nature of the synthetic pathways
allow for incredible diversity of the sulfation pattern between individual HS
molecules and by association the substrates that they may bind. Determination
of HS structure occurs during synthesis and modification in the extracellular
space by the coordinated effect of extracellular sulfatases or sulfotransferases
(Nakato and Kimata, 2002; Westling and Lindahl, 2002). The mechanism of
these modifying enzymes is unknown; however, based upon analysis of HS chain
sequence and functional differences it is apparent that their actions are inconsistent, resulting in varied sulfation. The expression of these enzymes by HSPGproducing cells may vary from cell to cell (Lindahl et al., 1998). This structural
heterogeneity of HS manifests as a functional heterogeneity that is demonstrated
by differential substrate-binding ability in that HS from the same core protein.
species may vary between tissues (Smits et al., 2004; Knox et al., 2002), between
cellular origin (Whitelock et al., 1996), and on the same singular core protein.
Cellular expression of HS-synthesizing and HS-modifying enzymes is differentially expressed and differentially regulated throughout the tissues of the body
(Lamanna et al., 2006; Properzi et al., 2008), throughout development (Brickman
et al., 1998) and in pathological conditions (Jayson et al., 1998; Nawroth et al.,
2007). This finding means that there is no direct correlation between the expression of a core protein and the effects of the HS that it contains. Of particular note
is that regions of increased proliferative ­ability demonstrate a markedly different
expression of these HS-modifying enzymes (Grobe et al., 2002; Lindahl et al.,
1998; Langsdorf et  al., 2007). Despite their presence within all extracellular
environments, HS can still provide for unique control of signaling events within
the neurogenic niche.

120

F. Mercier et al.

The function of a single HS chain is dependent on its sulfation pattern, with a
single HS capable of binding to a number of substrates with varied success.
Once bound to a substrate, the HS serves to protect the substrate from proteolytic
cleavage (Saksela et al., 1988) until it can be released into the extracellular milieu
by heparanase activity (Whitelock et al., 1996), or passed to another HS chain or
receptor with higher substrate affinity. In facilitating the signaling event, HS
increases receptor affinity for the substrate, which may occur through inducing a
conformational change in the substrate, such as with interferon-g (Lortat-Jacob
and Grimaud, 1991), or by stabilizing a dimer structure, such as with FGF2
(Mohammadi et al., 2005). Additional steps that are required for HS to function as
a signaling cofactor require additional sequence specificity to allow for receptor
and or substrate dimerization (Venkataraman et  al., 1996). Differences in the
two signaling HS molecules for a single substrate may also affect the mechanism of
signaling by induction of altered receptor conformation or by inducing endocytosis
(Reiland and Rapraeger, 1993). The involvement of HS in binding to the receptor
during complex formation has been demonstrated in some cases and can be altered
by the addition or subtraction of a single sulfate group (Goodger et al., 2008).
Individual HS chains may associate with a stable of growth factors with varied
affinity and function based upon their specific sulfation pattern (Bernfield et al., 1992;
Walker et al., 1994). Within a single niche exist numerous HS chains, each with multiple overlapping functions. Using different portions of the same chain, a single HS
may be sufficiently able to facilitate the signaling of tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a)
and act in a purely storage manner for Wnt while another HS may cause signaling of
both Wnt and FGF2. This purpose of this functional redundancy is unknown but may
be to allow for feedback control or competition for the HS cofactor within a niche.
The highly variable HS is also subject to significant feedback, largely from
molecules with which it normally complexes (Sharma et al., 1998; Kaji et al., 2006).
A single growth factor signal may induce expression of specific HS via expression
of their core protein (Kobayashi et  al., 1992) and upregulate or downregulate
HS-modifying enzymes (Narita et al., 2007) to effectively alter the composition of
the extracellular HSPG and its ability to interact with growth factors. The importance of understanding niche-specific HS dynamics is crucial to understanding how
the growth factors affect cellular behavior within the niche.
4.6.1.3 The HSPG of the Neurogenic Niche
Despite HSPG role in plasticity throughout the body, little has been done to identify
those molecules that make up the niche and participate in adult neurogenesis. A
large density of both cell-surface and basement membrane HSPG (BM-HSPG) exist
within the neurogenic niches (Kerever et al., 2007) but only four, possibly five, have
been shown to concentrate within the niche, with more likely to come. Two members
of the syndecan family, syndecan-1 and syndecan-3, are found throughout the SVZRMS-OB pathway (Kim et al., 1994; Hienola et al., 2006). Syndecan-3 is localized to
more mature migrating neuroblasts and has been implicated in heparin-binding
growth-associated molecule (HBGAM)-mediated chemotaxis (Hienola et al., 2006),

4  Fractones: Home and Conductors of the Neural Stem Cell Niche

121

but the origin and function of syndecan-1 in the adult and embryonic brain are
unknown. Glypican-1 distribution is diffused throughout the entire brain, but
immunoreactivity is strongest within the SVZ (Litwack et al. 1998). Of particular
interest is the localization of FGFR2 to astrocytes within the SVZ and DG
(Chadashvili et al., 2006). This receptor moonlights as an HSPG (Sakaguchi et al.,
1999) and may exist in this form within the niches. Perlecan, an HSPG of the BM
variety, was localized to fractones as well as the very interesting HS antibody 10E4
from Seikagaku Corp. (Kerever et al., 2007). In addition to possible roles in growth
factor signaling, the HS chains of perlecan have been shown to participate in collagen-1 fibril scaffolding (Yang et al., 2005) and may account for the characterization
of some fractones to contain collagen-1 (Mercier et al., 2002). Perlecan-IR structures
were not limited to fractones but were a significant component of both the vascular
and meningeal basement membranes. Within the fractone population itself, there
existed a small percentage of fractone that were void of perlecan immunoreactivity.
This compositional heterogeneity of the structures may be the result of an intrinsic
nature or fractone turnover caused by matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) and tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMP) activity within the highly plastic niche
(Whitelock et al., 1996; Fitzgerald et al., 1999). The 10E4 antibody from Seikagaku
Corp. is a unique entity in its recognition of a specific sugar sequence of the HS
chain itself rather than a traditional peptide epitope. Localization of this antibody in
the adult brain was restricted to another subpopulation of fractones and a few specialized meningeal locations such as the choroid plexus (Kerever et  al., 2007).
Although the specific HS sequence of 10E4 is unknown, it is particularly significant
in that it localizes the functional aspect of the HSPG molecule rather than the core
protein. The restricted localization of the specialization and its association with
FGF2-specific binding capability of fractones bodes well for a model of fractonemediated neurogenesis.
In the embryo, fractone structures have been identified in the immature brain at
numerous times (unpublished results). At embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5), fractone demonstrated immunoreactivity to the additional BM-HSPG agrin and collagen-18.
Collagen-18 was localized almost entirely to 10E4, suggesting a possible host for the
HS sequence; however, until they can be isolated biochemically it will be difficult to
definitively identify the HSPG or multiple HSPG that express the 10E4 epitope.
Agrin expression was diminished in comparison to collagen-18 and found within
both fractone and meningeal tissue. These two HSPGs also displayed a heterogeneity
among the fractone population, mirroring the results seen by perlecan in the adult.
Agrin and collagen-18 have yet to be identified within the adult neurogenic zones.

4.6.2 Paracrine Roles of BM-HSPG: Focus on FGF Signaling
From their vantage, BM-HSPG can oversee the various cells within the neurogenic
niche and when sought out may present growth factors and cytokines that direct cell
fate. This process involves a two-step sequence of growth factor sequestering and
storage until presentation to the cell-surface receptor (Fig.  4.5). Sequestration

122

F. Mercier et al.

Fig.  4.5  Two-step mechanism for BM-HSPG mediated signaling. Step 1: Growth factor (GF)
captured by HSPG molecules within the basement membrane (BM). Until presentation of receptor, BM stores GF. Step 2: Stem cell contacts BM-HSPG structure to form tertiary complex of
HSPG/GF/receptor, resulting in signal transduction and cellular response

among many heparin-binding growth factors implicated in neurogenesis, FGF2 is
the most well characterized endogenous signal present in the neurogenic zones. It
has been shown that FGF2 requires binding to perlecan to exert its cytogenic activity in the peripheral tissues (Brickman et  al., 1995; Aviezer et  al., 1994; Yayon
et  al., 1991; Rapraeger, 1995). Perlecan is a large HSPG that consists of a core
protein and several heparan-sulfate sites that represent low-affinity receptors for
FGF-2. Yayon and colleagues provided the first demonstration that FGF2 is not
biologically active by itself, using COS-7 cells that were manipulated to express a
very low level of HSPGs but expressed FGF receptors (Yayon et al., 1991; Aviezer
et  al., 1994). The authors demonstrated that HSPG− FGF-R+ COS-7 cells cannot
proliferate in the presence of FGF2 unless exogenous heparin or perlecan is added
to the culture medium. They further demonstrated that FGF-2 binds to the heparan

4  Fractones: Home and Conductors of the Neural Stem Cell Niche

123

sulfate chains of perlecan and that this binding is necessary for the binding of FGF2
to the high-affinity receptors located at the cell surface. Rapraeger and colleagues
further demonstrated that this mechanism physiologically exists in the adult skin,
and that two distinct intracellular mechanisms coexist for the biological activation
of FGF2. The first mechanism, the perlecan/FGF2 complex, triggers protein kinase
cascades that are activated by their association with the cell-surface receptors
(FGFR) and ultimately lead to the biological activity of FGF2. Alternatively, the
FGF2/perlecan complex enters the cell by endocytosis to reach the cell nucleus
where FGF2 acts as a transcription factor (Reiland and Rapraeger, 1993). It is
not clear whether one or the other pathway favors cell proliferation versus cell
differentiation. Through crystallographic techniques, Goodger et  al. (2008) have
demonstrated the viability of both the symmetrical and asymmetrical models of
HS/FGF2/receptor complex formation based upon the presence or absence of a
single sulfate group. Both models have the respective ratio of 1:2:2 of
HS:FGF2:FGFR, but the HS of the asymmetrical complex lacks the ability to bind
the second receptor although the receptor remains in the complex through its connection to FGF2. It is unclear if both these types occur in vivo; however, this rationale may explain the multiple pathways of FGF2 signaling that Rapraeger et  al.
have described. In the brain, it is clear that FGF2 induces NSPC proliferation and
differentiation both in vivo and in vitro. Although in terms of HS-mediated signaling knowledge of the FGF2 pathway is without doubt the most advanced, little is
known of the specific interactions that occur within the restricted niches which
account for the widely variable effect of this growth factor upon proliferative processes. The close association of potent mitogenic factors such as FGF2 with perlecan and the other BM-HSPGs within notable mitotic regions such as epidermis and
marrow stroma (Klein et al., 1995; Blanpain et al., 2004) highlights the importance
of BM-HSPG/GF interactions, especially in light of the discovery of fractone and
the vascular niches for neurogenesis.

4.6.3 Fractones Collect and Concentrate Heparin-Binding
Growth Factors
Knowing that the ECM, and particularly basement membranes, intervene in the
process of growth factor activation to induce cell proliferation and differentiation
and ultimately promote cytogenesis (Yayon et al., 1991; Aviezer et al., 1994), we
proposed that fractones regulate proliferation, differentiation, and migration in the
SVZ (Mercier et  al., 2002). To test the potential of fractones for binding FGF2
in vitro, we modified the experimental protocol of Chang et al. (2000) for in situ
binding on frozen sections (Chang et al., 2000) and used biotinylated FGF2 as a
ligand. Biotinylation allowed visualizing FGF2 together with fractone antigens that
were revealed by immunofluorescence in another channel. FGF2 was biotinylated
according to the manufacturer (Pierce biotinylation kit) and was incubated on brain
frozen sections of the adult mouse and rat before staining with streptavidin Texas

124

F. Mercier et al.

red. The sections were also immunostained for laminin or perlecan to determine the
exact location of fractones and capillaries in the ventricle wall. After observation
by confocal microscopy, we found that biotinylated FGF2 was specifically located
in fractones (Kerever et al., 2007). We also demonstrated that fractones could not
bind biotinylated FGF2 when the sections were pretreated with heparatinase. Heparatinase effectiveness was assessed by absence of antigenicity for HSPG, using immunolabeling for an antibody specifically directed against N-sulfate HSPG (10E4;
Seikagaku). Without N-sulfate domains, fractones cannot bind FGF2. These results
indicate that FGF2 binding on fractones depends on HSPG (Kerever et al., 2007).
In other experiments, biotinylated FGF2 was injected into the lateral ventricle of
adult rats or mice that were killed at different times after injection to determine
whether, and when, FGF2 binding occurs in vivo. Brain sections were incubated with
streptavidin Texas red and counterstained for laminin. We found that fractones, and
no other structures in brain, sequestered FGF2 in vivo 30 min after cerebral ventricle
injection in both rat (Fig. 4.6a,b) and mouse (Kerever et al., 2007). FGF2 was also
detected on fractones 5 days after injection, suggesting that fractones store FGF2 after
binding (Kerever et al., 2007). Detailed observation of FGF2 binding along the ventricle walls indicated preferential zones in the ventricle walls, with fractones of
the corpus callosum and lateral septal nucleus more labeled than those of the caudate
putamen in the anterior portion of the lateral ventricle. Most of the fractones of the
third ventricle wall did not bind FGF2, even days after injection. Similar results
were found with in situ binding of biotinylated FGF2, suggesting that fractones are
functionally heterogeneous and have different affinities for GFs according to their
location in brain. In similar experiments, we coinjected BrDU with biotinylated FGF2
or native FGF2 (as a control) to determine the neurogenic potential of biotinylated
FGF2. After counting BrDU-immunoreactive cells in the lateral ventricle walls, we
demonstrated that cerebral ventricle injection of biotinylated FGF2 and native FGF2
induces a similar neurogenic response. This finding suggests that biotinylated
FGF2 mimics the effects of native FGF2 and that biotinylated FGF2 can be used as
a marker for investigating FGF2/HSPG interactions in fractones.
Based on the potential of HSPG in basement membranes (Figs. 4.4 and 4.5), we
hypothesized that fractones promote FGF-2 activity at the NSPC surface to induce
NSPC proliferation and differentiation, and to ultimately produce new neurons and
glial cells. Figure 4.6c illustrates the ultrastructure of the SVZa niche and its relationship with the ventricular cavity. The potential mechanism that is responsible for
neurogenesis is illustrated in Fig. 4.6d. After entering the SVZ via interstitial clefts
(Brightman, 2002), and binding to fractone-HSPG, FGF2 would be activated and
presented to NSPC surface receptors. Then, intracellular protein kinase cascades
would mediate FGF2 neurogenic activity. Experimentally, we studied the effect
of preventing FGF2 binding on fractones (via heparanase; Kerever et al., 2007)
to determine whether lack of FGF2 binding on fractones results in the loss of FGF2induced neurogenesis in the SVZa. Our preliminary results indicate that
FGF2-induced neurogenesis, assessed by increase of BrdU incorporation in the
SVZa, is prevented by heparanase pretreatment. Thus, these preliminary results

4  Fractones: Home and Conductors of the Neural Stem Cell Niche

125

Fig.  4.6  Fractones collect and concentrate fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) via HSPG:
hypothesis on fractone function. (a) Binding FGF2 to fractones in the adult mouse 30 min after
intracerebroventricular injection of biotinylated FGF2. FGF2 binding was revealed by streptavidin Texas red (arrows). Arrowheads indicate blood vessels that are not bound by FGF2.
(b) Immunoreactivity for laminin in the section shown in (a), indicating the location of fractones
(arrows) and blood vessels (arrowheads). (c) Ultrastructure of the SVZa shows neuroblasts
(arrows) next to a fractone (arrowhead). VC, ventricular cavity. (d) Hypothesis of fractone
function in the SVZ of the lateral ventricle. Heparin-binding growth factors that are produced by
the choroid plexus are released in the ventricle cavity (1), then enter the SVZ via interstitial
clefts (2) to bind fractone-HSPG (3). The HSPG present the growth factor to the NSPC surface
receptors (4), promoting intracellular protein kinase cascades that trigger proliferation (5) and
differentiation (6)

126

F. Mercier et al.

support the view that HSPG/FGF2 interactions within fractones are responsible for
FGF2 activation at the NSPC surface.

4.7 Fractones During Brain Development
To determine whether fractones exist during development, we immunolabeled
serial sections of mouse embryos at different stages of development (from E7.5 to
E17.5), and postnatal life, with laminin, BrdU, and phosphorylated histone 3
(PH3), a marker of the mitosis M phase. We found numerous laminin+ puncta of
size ranging from 0.5 to 3  mm at E7.5 through the growing neuroepithelium.
Figure 4.2c shows double immunolabeling for PH3 (revealed by Alexa fluor 546,
red) and laminin (revealed by Alexa fluor 647, blue) at the edge of the fourth
­ventricle. Clusters of postmitotic cells are clearly visible and are surrounded by
laminin+ puncta that are similar in size (although additional puncta <1 mm are also
visible) and distribution to adult fractones. However, the presence of fractones in
the depths of the neuroepithelium, and in perimeningeal locations, clearly indicates
that fractone functions may be involved in promoting neuroepithelial cell proliferation during development. Triple immunolabel for laminin, BrdU, and PH3 at all
stages of development revealed complex patterns of pre- or postmitotic cell associations with fractones that vary at multiple developmental stages and currently are
being investigated. Overall, fractones appear very early during development, entire
days before blood vessels, and hold a potential for intervening in the process of cell
proliferation in the developing brain.

4.8 Beyond the Neural Stem Cell Niche Function: Fractones
Processing Growth Factors and Cytokines
Fractones collect heparin-binding growth factors in the SVZ of the lateral ventricle
to provide signaling cues at the stem cell surface. But what is the function of fractones in the SVZ of other ventricles? Neural stem cells, defined by their ability to
produce multipotent neurospheres in  vitro, that is, by their potential to generate
neurons astrocytes and oligodendrocytes, are present throughout the whole SVZ,
including the third and fourth ventricles and the spinal canal (Weiss et al., 1996).
However, these zones produce either glia (spinal cord) or no new cells at all (third
ventricle; Saint Georges Chaumet et  al., 2008) under physiological conditions in
adulthood. When artificially stimulated by growth factors such as brain-derived
neurotrophic factor, these nonneurogenic zones can produce new neurons and glial
cells (Pencea et al., 2001; Martens et al., 2002). Together, these data suggest that
neural stem cells reside in the SVZ of the whole ventricular system but that the
balance of growth factor activity in the nonneurogenic niches prohibits activity.

4  Fractones: Home and Conductors of the Neural Stem Cell Niche

127

Therefore, the zones that contain fractones, that is, the neurogenic zone of the
lateral ventricle SVZ plus the SVZ of other ventricles (potential neurogenic zones),
house neural stem cells. However, vascular neurogenic niches, such as the DG, may
not contain neural stem cells, but only progenitors. Supporting this hypothesis, at
least one of the vascular niches, the DG, has been demonstrated to contain restricted
progenitors, whereas the fractone SVZ niche contains neural stem cells (Seaberg
and van der Kooy, 2002). A possible explanation is that growth factor/HSPG interactions provided by fractones in the SVZ lead to an environment that promotes
properties in the niche which preserve or generate stem cell fate, whereas vascular
niches cannot.
Another important possibility is that fractones collect, concentrate, and promote
heparin-binding growth factor activity for other purposes than regulating NSPC
behavior in the neurogenic niche. Fractones exist throughout the SVZ of the third
ventricle, which is adjacent to neuroendocrine nuclei such as the periventricular
nucleus or the suprachiasmatic nucleus. There, fractones and their HSPG may collect heparin-binding growth factors from the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or from
local astrocytes or microglia to influence neurohormone transcription and release
by neurons in the hypothalamus. We have previously reviewed the potential of
basement membranes in activating growth factors and cytokines (including numerous heparin-binding molecules) in the neuroendocrine system (Mercier and Hatton,
2004). With a mechanism similar to FGF2 capture in the SVZ of the lateral ventricle, the fractones of the third ventricle may capture, concentrate, and promote
heparin-binding growth factors at the astrocytic surface to influence these cells and
ultimately modify neuronal function via the numerous dendrites, axons, and neuronal nuclei that converge toward fractones (Mercier et al., 2003).
Knowing the distribution of fractones throughout the SVZ of the whole ventricular system (Mercier et  al., 2002, 2003; Kerever et  al., 2007), the lack of a
tight junction barrier, and the existence of interstitial clefts in the ependyma that
allow for the passage of large molecules from the ventricles to the SVZ
(Brightman, 1965, 2002), it is conceivable that fractones serve as collectors of
heparin-binding growth factors and cytokines for all neural nuclei adjacent to
ventricles. The extent of the ventricular system, including recesses (collapsed
extensions of the principal cavities) and aqueducts (sylvius) is such that a very
important number of neural nuclei are adjacent to an ependyma and SVZ. We
have shown that fractones exist in all ventricle cavities and recesses (Mercier
et al., 2002, 2003; Kerever et al., 2007). Therefore, numerous neural nuclei may
cross-talk via growth factors and cytokines, via the CSF in the ventricles as a
carrier for these molecules, and via fractones as collectors/effectors for signaling
in the recipient neuronal zone.
The choroid plexus and meninges may also intervene in cross-talk communication within the brain and between brain and blood (thus peripheral organs and
tissues). The choroid plexus is an important source of growth factors, including
FGF2 (Hayamizu et  al., 2001; Stopa et  al., 2001), one of the principal neurogenic growth factors in adulthood (Palmer et  al., 1995). Another role of the
choroid plexus is to provide signaling molecules for NSPC migration (Sawamoto

128

F. Mercier et al.

et al., 2006). Meninges also produce growth factors (Mercier and Hatton, 2001,
2004; Wieseler-Frank et  al., 2007) that potentially influence neurogenesis and
other brain functions. Therefore, choroid plexus and meninges may provide
growth factors and other signaling molecules for the NSPC niche and numerous
other brain zones.

4.9 Conclusion
Fractones hold a considerable promise as selective reservoirs and processors of
heparin-binding growth factors and cytokines in the adult brain. Their location all
along the ­ventricular system allows for capture of these signaling molecules from
the OB to the spinal cord, via the CSF playing the role of a carrier of signaling cues
through the ventricular system. Choroid plexus is a major source for signaling
molecules, but other brain zones facing the ventricles may directly release growth
factors and cytokines that could be taken up at every other place of the ventricular
system by fractones. Therefore, the ventricles may function as a pathway for these
molecules, and fractones may represent the effectors of an intercommunication
system within the brain. If this hypothesis is valid, the anatomy of the ventricles
would facilitate the exchange of chemical information between distinct neural
zones. The choroid plexus and meninges allow for additional routes of communication between the brain and peripheral organs as they are perfectly situated at the
interface of the blood and neural tissue proper to permit the exchange of signaling
cues. Investigations of this mechanism will be important for understanding the
physiology of the neural stem cell niche, offering insights into the interactions that
produce, release, capture, and ultimately direct factors and cytokines to the stem
cell surface. Analysis of the neurogenic niche will provide links with other proliferative ­processes and provide a paradigm for investigating stem cell fate. The most
promising and significant insight into the function of fractones is that together with
the ­ventricular system and meninges they may form a broad system for administrating cytokines and growth factors in the central nervous system.

References
Altman, J. (1963). Autoradiographic investigation of cell proliferation in the brain of cats and rats.
Anat. Rec. 145, 573–591.
Altman, J. (1969). Autoradiographic and histological studies of postnatal neurogenesis. IV. Cell
proliferation and migration in the anterior forebrain, with special reference to persisting neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb. J. Comp. Neurol. 137, 433–458.
Altman, J., Das, G.D. (1966). Autoradiographic and histological studies of postnatal neurogenesis.
I. A longitudinal investigation of the kinetics, migration and transformation of cells incorporating tritiated thymidine in neonate rats, with special references to postnatal neurogenesis in
some brain regions. J. Comp. Neurol. 126, 337–390.
Alvarez-Buylla, A., Nottebohm, F. (1988). Migration of young neurons in adult avian brain.
Nature 335, 353–354.

4  Fractones: Home and Conductors of the Neural Stem Cell Niche

129

Aviezer, D., Hecht, D., Safran, M., Elsinger, M. David, G., Yayon, A. (1994). Perlecan, basal
lamina proteoglycan, promotes basic fibroblast growth factor-receptor binding, mitogenesis,
and angiogenesis. Cell 79, 1005–1013.
Bernfield, M., Kokenyesi, R., Kato, M., Hinkes, M.T., Spring, J., Gallo, R.L. (1992). Biology of
the syndecans: a family of transmembrane heparan sulfate proteoglycans. Annu. Rev. Cell
Biol. 8, 365–93.
Bernfield, M., Banerjee, S.D., Koda, J.E., Rapraeger, A.C. (1994). Remodelling of basement
membranes as a mechanism of morphogenetic tissue interactions. In: Trelstadt, R.L. (ed)
The role of extracellular matrix in development. New York, Liss, A.R.
Bernfield, M., Gotte, M., Park, P., Reizes, O., Fitzgerald, M., Lincecum, J., Zako, M. (1999).
Functions of cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68, 729–777.
Blanpain, C., Lowry, W., Georghegan, A., Polak, L., Fuchs, E. (2004). Self-renewal, multipotency, and
the existence of two cell populations within an epithelial stem cell niche. Cell 118, 635–648.
Brickman, Y.G., Ford, M.D., Small, D.H., Bartlett, P.F., Nurcombe, V. (1995). Heparan sulfates
mediate the binding of basic fibroblast growth factor to a specific receptor on neural precursor
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 24941–24948.
Brickman, Y., Ford, M., Gallagher, J., Nurcombe, V., Bartlett, P., Turnbull, J. (1998). Structural
modification of fibroblast growth factor-binding heparan sulfate at a determinative stage of
neural development. J. Biol. Chem. 8:5, 4350–4359.
Brightman, M.W. (1965). The distribution within the brain of ferritin injected into cerebrospinal
fluid compartments. J. Cell Biol. 26, 99–123.
Brightman, M.W. (2002). The brain’s interstitial clefts and their glial walls. J. Neurocytol. 31,
595–603.
Chadashvili, T., Peterson, D. (2006). Cytoarchitecture of fibroblast growth factor receptor 2
(FGFR-2) immunoreactivity in astrocytes of neurogenic and non-neurogenic regions of the
young adult and aged rat brain. J. Comp. Neurol. 498:1, 1–15.
Chang, Z., Meyer, K., Rapraeger, A.C., Friedl, A. (2000). Differential ability of heparan sulfate proteoglycans to assemble the fibroblast growth factor receptor complex in situ. FASEB J. 14, 137–144.
Craig, CG, Tropepe, V, Morshead, CM, Reynolds, BA, Weiss, S, van der Kooy, D. (1996). In vivo
growth factor expansion of endogenous subependymal neural precursor cell populations in the
adult mouse brain. J. Neurosci. 16, 2649–2658.
Doetsch, F., Alvarez-Buylla, A. (1996). Network of tangential pathways for neuronal migration in
the adult mammalian brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 14895–14900.
Doetsch, F., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., Alvarez-Buylla, A. (1997). Cellular composition and threedimensional organization in the subventricular germinal zone in the adult mammalian brain.
J. Neurosci. 17, 5046–5061.
Falk, A., Frisen, J. (2002). Amphiregulin is a mitogen for adult neural stem cells. J. Neurosci. Res.
69, 757–762.
Fitzgerald, M., Hayward, I.P., Thomas, A.C., Campbell, G.R., Campbell, J.H. (1999). Matrix
metalloproteinase can facilitate the heparanase-induced promotion of phenotype change in
vascular smooth muscle cells. Atherosclerosis 145:1, 97–106.
Gallagher, J.T. (2001). Heparan sulfate: growth control with a restricted sequence menu. J. Clin.
Invest. 108:3, 357–361
Goodger, S., Robinson, C., Murphy, K., Gasiunas, N., Harmer, N., Blundell, T., Pye, D., Gallagher, J.
(2008). Evidence that heparin saccharides promote FGF2 mitogenesis through two distinct
mechanisms. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 13001–13008.
Gordon, M.Y., Riley, G.P., Watt, S.M., Greaves, M.F. (1987). Compartmentalization of a haematopoeitic growth factor (GM-CSF) by glycosaminoglycans in the bone marrow microenvironment. Nature 326, 403–405.
Grobe, K., Ledin, J., Ringvall, M., Holmborn, K., Forsberg, E., Esko, J.D., Kjellén, L. (2002).
Heparan sulfate and development: differential roles of the N-acetylglucosamine N-deacetylase/
N-sulfotransferase isozymes. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1573:3, 209–215.
Guimond, S., Maccarana, M., Olwin, B., Lindahl, U., Rapraeger, A. (1993). Activating and inhibitory heparin sequences for FGF-2 (basic FGF) distinct requirements for FGF-1, FGF-2, and
FGF-4. J. Biol. Chem. 268, 23906–23914.

130

F. Mercier et al.

Halfter, W. (1998). Disruption of the retinal basal lamina during early embryonic development
leads to a retraction of vitral endfeet, an increase number of ganglion cells, and aberrant axonal
outgrowth. J. Comp. Neurol. 397, 99–104.
Hayamizu, T.F., Chan, P.T., Johanson, C.E. (2001). FGF-2 immunoreactivity in adult rat ependyma
and choroid plexus: responses to global forebrain ischemia and intraventricular FGF-2.
Neurol. Res. 23, 353–358.
Hienola, A., Pekkanen, M., Raulo, E., (2004). HB-GAM inhibits proliferation and enhances
differentiation of neural stem cells. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 26, 75–88.
Hienola, A., Tumova, S., Kulesskiy, E., Rauvala, H. (2006). N-syndecan deficiency impairs neural
migration in the brain. J. Cell Biol. 174, 569–580.
Iozzo, R.V. (2005). Basement membrane proteoglycans: from cellar to ceiling. Nat. Rev. Mol.
Cell. Biol. 6, 646–656.
Jasuja, R., Allen, B., Pappano, W., Rapraeger, A., Greenspan, D. (2004). Cell-surface heparen
sulfate proteoglycans chordin antagonism of bone morphogenetic protein signaling and are
necessary for cellular uptake of chordin. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 51289–51297.
Jayson, G.C., Lyon, M., Paraskeva, C., Turnbull, J.E., Deakin, J.A., Gallagher, J.T. (1998).
Heparan sulfate undergoes specific structural changes during the progression from human
colon adenoma to carcinoma in vitro. J. Biol. Chem. 273:1, 51–57.
Kaji, T., Yamamoto, C., Oh-i, M., Fujiwara, Y., Yamazaki, Y., Morita, T., Plaas, A.H., Wight, T.N.
(2006). The vascular endothelial growth factor VEGF165 induces perlecan synthesis via
VEGF receptor-2 in cultured human brain microvascular endothelial cells. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1760:9, 1465–1474.
Kerever, A., Schnack, J., Vellinga, D., Ichikawa, N., Moon, C., Arikawa-Hirasawa, E., Efird, J.T.,
Mercier, F. (2007). Novel extracellular matrix structures in the neural stem cell niche capture
the neurogenic factor FGF-2 from the extracellular milieu. Stem Cells 25, 2146–2157.
Kim, C.W., Goldberger, O.A., Gallo, R.L., Bernfield, M. (1994). Members of the syndecan family
of heparan sulfate proteoglycans are expressed in distinct cell-,tissue-, and developmentspecific patterns. Mol. Biol. Cell 5, 797–805.
Kim, S.J., Son, T.G., Kim, K., Park, H.R., Mattson, M.P., Lee, J. (2007). Interferon-gamma
promotes differentiation of neural progenitor cells via the JNK pathway. Neurochem. Res. 32,
1399–1406.
Klein, G., Conzelmann, S., Beck, S., Timpl, R., Müller, C.A. (1995). Perlecan in human bone
marrow: a growth-factor-presenting, but anti-adhesive, extracellular matrix component for
hematopoietic cells. Matrix Biol. 14, 457–465.
Knox, S., Merry, C., Stringer, S., Melrose, J., Whitelock, J. (2002). Not all perlecans are created
equal. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 14657–14665.
Kobayashi, M., Shimada, K., Ozawa, T. (1992). Human platelet-derived transforming growth
factor-beta stimulates synthesis of glycosaminoglycans in cultured porcine aortic endothelial
cells. Gerontology 38, 36–42.
Kuhn, H.G., Winkler, J., Kempermann, G. Thal, L.J., Gage, F.H. (1997). Epidermal growth factor
and fibroblast growth factor-2 have different effects on neural progenitors in the adult rat brain.
J. Neurosci. 17, 5820–5827.
Lamanna, W.C., Baldwin, R.J., Padva, M., Kalus, I., Ten Dam, G., van Kuppevelt, T.H., Gallagher,
J.T., von Figura, K., Dierks, T., Merry, C.L. (2006). Heparan sulfate 6-O-endosulfatases:
discrete in vivo activities and functional co-operativity. Biochem. J. 400, 63–73.
Langsdorf, A., Do, A.T., Kusche-Gullberg, M., Emerson, C.P. Jr, Ai, X. (2007). Sulfs are regulators of growth factor signaling for satellite cell differentiation and muscle regeneration. Dev.
Biol. 311:2, 464–477.
Lim, D., Tramontin, A., Trevejo, J., Herrera, D., Garcia-Verdugi, J., Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2000). Noggin
antagonizes BMP signaling to create a niche for adult neurogenesis. Neuron 28, 713–726.
Lindahl, U., Kusche-Gullberg, M., Kjellen, L. (1998). Regulated diversity of heparan sulfate.
J. Biol. Chem. 273:29, 24979–24982.
Litwack, E.D., Ivins, J.K., Kumbasor, A., Paine-Saunolers, S., Stipp, C.S., Lanoler, A.D. (1998).
Expression of the heparan sulfate proteoglycon glypicon-1 in the developing rodent. Dev. Dyn.
211, 72–87.

4  Fractones: Home and Conductors of the Neural Stem Cell Niche

131

Lois, C., Alvarez-Buylla, A. (1994). Long distance neuronal migration in the adult mammalian
brain. Science 264, 1145–1148.
Lortat-Jacob, H., Grimaud, J.A. (1991). Interferon-gamma C-terminal function: networking
hypothesis. Heparan sulfate and heparin, new targets for IFNGamma, protect, relax the
cytokine and regulate its activity. Cell Mol. Biol. 37:3, 253–260.
Mandelbrot, B.B. (ed) (1983). The fractal geometry of nature. Freeman, San Francisco
Martens, D.J., Seaber, R.M., van der Kooy, D. (2002). In vivo infusions of exogenous growth
factors into the fourth ventricle of the adult mouse brain increase the proliferation of neural
progenitors around the fourth ventricle and the central canal of the spinal cord. Eur. J. Neurosci.
16, 1045–1057.
Mercier, F. (2004). Astroglia as a modulation interface between meninges and neurons. In: Hatton,
G.I., Parpura, V. (eds) Glial/neuronal signaling. Amsterdam, Kluwer Pub, 125–162.
Mercier, F., Hatton, G.I. (2000). Immunocytochemical basis for a meningeo-glial network. J. Comp.
Neurol. 420, 445–465.
Mercier, F., Hatton, G.I. (2001). Connexin 26 and bFGF are primarily expressed in subpial and
subependymal layers in adult brain parenchyma: roles in stem cell proliferation and morphological plasticity? J. Comp. Neurol. 431, 88–104.
Mercier, F., Hatton, G.I. (2004). Meninges and perivasculature as mediators of CNS plasticity.
In: Bittar, E.E., Hertz, L. (eds.) Non-neuronal cells in the nervous system: function and
dysfunction. Elsevier Bioscience, Amsterdam, Adv. Mol. Cell. Biol. 31, 215–253.
Mercier, F., Kitasako, J.T., Hatton, G.I. (2002). Anatomy of the brain neurogenic zones revisited:
fractones and the fibroblast/macrophage network. J. Comp. Neurol. 451, 170–188.
Mercier, F., Kitasako, J.T., Hatton, G.I. (2003). Fractones and other basal laminae in the hypothalamus. J. Comp. Neurol. 455, 324–340.
Mohammadi, M., Olsen, S.K., Ibrahimi, O.A. (2005). Structural basis for fibroblast receptor
activation. Cyt. Growth Fact. Rev. 16, 107–137.
Monje, M.L., Toda, H., Palmer, T.D. (2003). Inflammatory blockade restores adult hippocampal
neurogenesis. Science, 302, 1760–1765.
Mulloy, B., Forster, M.J., Jones, C., Drake, A.F., Johnson, E.A., Davies, D.B. (1994). The effect
of variation of substitution on the solution conformation of heparin: a spectroscopic and
molecular modelling study. Carbohydr. Res. 255, 1–26.
Nakato, H., Kimata, K. (2002). Heparan sulfate fine structure and specificity of proteoglycan
functions. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1573:3, 312–318.
Narita, K., Chien, J., Mullany, S.A., Staub, J., Qian, X., Lingle, W.L., Shridhar, V. (2007). Loss of
HSulf-1 expression enhances autocrine signaling mediated by amphiregulin in breast cancer.
J Biol. Chem. 282:19, 14413–14420.
Nawroth, R., Zante, A., Cervantes, S., McManus, M., Helbrok, M., Rosen, S. (2007). Extracellular
sulfatases, elements of the WNT signaling pathway, positively regulate growth and tumorigenicity of human pancreatic cancer cells. PLoS One 2:4, 1–11.
Ornitz, D.M., Yayon, A., Flanagan, J.G., Svahn, C.M., Levi, E., Leder, P. (1992). Heparin is
required for cell-free binding of basic fibroblastic growth factor to a soluble receptor and for
mitogenesis in whole cells. Mol. Cell. Biol. 12, 240–247.
Paine-Saunders, S., Vivano, B., Economides, A., Saunders, S. (2002). Heparan sulfate proteoglycans retain noggins at the cell surface: a potential mechanism for shaping bone morphogenic
protein gradients. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 2089–2096.
Palmer, T.D., Ray, J., Gage, F.H. (1995). FGF-2 responsive neuronal progenitors reside in proliferative and quiescent regions of the adult rodent brain. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 6, 474–486.
Palmer, T.D., Willhoite, A.R., Gage, F.H. (2000). Vascular niche for adult hippocampal neurogenesis. J. Comp. Neurol. 425, 479–494.
Pencea, V., Bingaman, K.D., Wiegand, S.J., Luskin, M.B. (2001). Infusion of brain derived neurotrophic growth factor into the lateral ventricle of the adult rat leads to new neurons in the
parenchyma of the striatum, septum, thalamus, and hypothalamus. J. Neurosci. 21, 6706–6717.
Proia, P., Schiera, G., Mineo, M., Ingrassia, A.M., Santoro, G., Savettieri, G., Di Liegro, I. (2008).
Astrocytes shed extracellular vesicles that contain fibroblast growth factor-2 and vascular
endothelial growth factor. Int. J. Mol. Med. 21, 63–67.

132

F. Mercier et al.

Properzi, F., Lin, R., Kwok, J., Naidu, M., Van Kuppevelt, T., Dam, G., Camargo, L., RahaChowdhury, R., Furukawa, Y., Mikami, T., Sugahara, K. (2008). Heparan sulphate proteoglycan in glia and in the normal and injured CNS: expression of sulphotransferases and changes
in sulphation. Eur. J. Neurosci. 27, 593–604.
Rapraeger, A. (1995). In the clutches of proteoglycans: how does heparan sulfate regulate FGF
binding. Chem. Biol. 2, 137–144.
Reiland, J., Rapraeger, A.C. (1993). Heparan sulfate protoglycan and FGF receptor target basic
FGF to different intracellular destinations. J. Cell Sci. 105, 1085–1093.
Rider, C.C. (2006). Heparin/heparan sulphate binding in the TGF-beta cytokine super family.
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 34, 458–460.
Roberts, R., Gallagher, J., Spooncer, E., Allen, T.D., Bloomfield, F., Dexter, T.M. (1988). Heparan
sulfate bond growth factors: a mechanism for stromal cell mediated haemopoiesis. Nature
332, 376–378.
Sakaguchi, K., Lorenzi, M.V., Bottaro, D.P., Miki, T. (1999). The acidic domain and first
immunoglobulin-like loop of fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 modulate downstream
signaling through glycosaminoglycan modification. Mol. Cell. Biol. 19, 6754–6764.
Saksela, O., Moscatelli, D., Sommer, A., Rifkin, D.B. (1988). Endothelial cell-derived heparan
sulfate binds basic fibroblast growth factor and protects it from proteolytic degradation. J. Cell
Biol. 107:2, 743–51.
Sawamoto, K., Wichterle, H., Gonzalez-Perez, O., Choifin, J.A., Yamada, M., Spassky, N., Murcia,
N.S., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., Marin, O., Rubenstein, J.L.M., Tessier-Lavigne, M., Okano,
H., Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2006). New neurons follow the flow of cerebrospinal fluid in the adult
brain. Science 311, 626–632.
Seaberg, R.M., van der Kooy, D. (2002). Adult rodent neurogenic regions: the ventricular
subependyma contains neural stem cells, but the dentate gyrus contains restricted progenitors.
J. Neurosci. 22, 1784–1793.
Seki, T., Array, Y. (1993). Highly polysialylated neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM-H) is
expressed by newly generated granule cells in the dentate gyrus of the adult rat. J. Neurosci.
13, 2351–2358.
Seri, B., Herrera, D.G., Gritti, A., Ferron, S., Collado, L., Vescovi, A., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M.,
Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2006). Composition and organization of the SCZ: a large germinal layer
containing neural stem cells in the adult mammalian brain. Cereb. Cortex 16, 103–111.
Sharma, B., Iozzo, R. (1998). Transcriptional silencing of perlecan gene expression by interferon.
J. Biol. Chem. 273, 4642–4646.
Smits, N.C., Robbesom, A.A., Versteeg, E.M., van de Westerlo, E.M., Dekhuijzen, P.N., van
Kuppevelt, T.H. (2004). Heterogeneity of heparan sulfates in human lung. Am. J. Respir. Cell
Mol. Biol. 30, 166–173.
Stopa, E.G., Berzin, T.M., Kim, S., Song, P., Kuo-Leblanc, V., Rodriguez-Wolf, M., Baird, A.,
Johanson, C.E. (2001). Choroid plexus growth factors: what are the implications for CSF
dynamics in Alzheimer’s disease? Exp. Neurol. 167, 40–47.
Stringer, S., Gallagher, J. (1997). Heparan sulfate. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 29:5, 709–714.
Unger, E., Pettersson, I., Eriksson, U.J., Lindahl, U., Kjellén, L. (1991). Decreased activity of the
heparan sulfate-modifying enzyme glucosaminyl N-deacetylase in hepatocytes from streptozotocin-diabetic rats. J. Biol. Chem. 266:14, 43–961.
Venkataraman, G., Sasisekharan, V., Herr, A.B., Ornitz, D.M., Waksman, G., Cooney, C.L.,
Langer, R., Sasisekharan, R. (1996). Preferential self-association of basic fibroblastic growth
factor is stabilized by heparin during receptor dimerization and activation. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 93, 845–890.
Vlodavsky, I., Korner, G., Ishai-Michaeli, R., Bashkin, P., Bar-Shavit, R., Fuks, Z. (1990).
Extracellular matrix-resident growth factors and enzymes: possible involvement in tumor
metastasis and angiogenesis. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 32:3, 313–318
Walker, A., Turnbul, J., Gallagher, J. (1994). Specific heparan sulfate saccharides mediate the
activity of basic fibroblast growth factor. J. Biol. Chem. 269:2, 931–935.

4  Fractones: Home and Conductors of the Neural Stem Cell Niche

133

Weiss, S., Dunne, C., Hewson, J. (1996). Multipotent CNS stem cells are present in the adult
mammalian spinal cord and ventricular neuroaxis. J. Neurosci. 16, 7599–7609.
Westling, C., Lindahl, U. (2002). Location of N-unsubstituted glucosamine residues in heparan
sulfate. J. Biol. Chem. 277:51, 49247–49255.
Wexler, E.M., Geschwind, D.H., Palmer, T.D. (2007). Lithium regulates adult hippocampal progenitor development through canonical wnt pathway activation. Mol. Psychiatr. 13:285–292.
Whitelock, J., Murdoch, A., Iozzo, R., Underwood, A. (1996). The degradation of human endothelial cell-derived perlecan and release of bound basis fibroblast growth factor by stromelysin
collagenase, plasmin, and heparanases. J. Biol. Chem. 271:17, 10079–10086.
Wieseler-Frank, J., Jekich, B.M., Mahoney, J.H., Bland, S.T., Maier, S.F., Watkins, L.R. (2007).
A novel immune to CNS communication pathway: cells of the meninges surrounding the
spinal cord CSF space produce proinflammatory cytokines in response to an inflammatory
cytokine. Brain Behav. Immun. 21, 711–718.
Wurmser, H.M, Palmer, T.D., Gage, F.H. (2004). Neuroscience-Cellular interactions in the stem
cell niches. Science 304, 1253–1255.
Yang, W.D., Gomes, R.R. Jr, Alicknavitch, M., Farach-Carson, M.C., Carson, D.D. (2005).
Perlecan domain I promotes fibroblast growth factor 2 delivery in collagen I fibril scaffolds.
Tissue Eng. 11:1–2, 76–89.
Yayon, A., Klagsbrun, M., Esko, J.D., Leder, P., Ornitz, D.P. (1991). Cell surface, heparin-like
molecules are required for binding of basic fibroblast growth factor to its high affinity receptor.
Cell 64, 841–848.
Yurchenko, P.D., Schyttny, J.C. (1990). Molecular architecture of basement membranes. FASEB
J. 4, 1577–1590.

Part III

Adult Neurogenesis in
Non-mammalian Vertebrates

Chapter 5

Adult Neurogenesis in Teleost Fish
Günther K.H. Zupanc

Abstract  Adult neurogenesis in the brain of teleost fish has been studied since the
1960s. These investigations have demonstrated mitotic activity in dozens of brain
areas and relative rates of cell proliferation 10–100 times higher than in the adult
mammalian brain. The source of the new cells are stem cells in distinct ­proliferation
zones, which give rise to both neurons and glial cells. Depending on the brain
region, the young cells either reside in close vicinity to the proliferation zone from
which they originate, or they migrate long distance to specific target areas. During
migration, they are guided by radial glial fibers. Approximately half the young
cells undergo apoptotic cell death within the first few weeks of their life; the other
half persist long term. This continuous addition of new cells to the population of
older cells leads to a permanent growth of the brain. A major function of adult
neurogenesis in teleosts appears to be to ensure numerical matching of neurons
in the central nervous system and sensory receptors cells or muscle fibers in the
periphery. Neurogenesis also plays a central role in brain repair by replacing cells
lost to injury by newly generated ones. Large-scale identification of regenerationassociated proteins by proteome analysis has revealed cytoskeletal proteins essential for the formation of new cells, proteins involved in cell proliferation, cellular
motility, neuroprotection, and energy metabolism, as well as a zinc finger protein
that may act as a transcriptional regulator.

5.1 Introduction
The beginnings of the study of adult neurogenesis in teleost fish date back to the
late 1960s and early 1970s, shortly after the pioneering work of Joseph Altman
(Altman 1962, 1969; Altman and Das 1965) had suggested the possibility of
­generation of new neurons in both the intact and the injured mammalian brain.
G.K.H. Zupanc (*)
Department of Biology, Northeastern University, 134 Mugar Life Science Building,
360 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA
e-mail: g.zupanc@neu.edu

T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_5, © Springer 2011

137

138

G.K.H. Zupanc

Based on classical histological approaches (Kirsche 1967) and [3H]thymidine
­autoradiography (Rahmann 1968; Kranz and Richter 1970a,b; Richter and Kranz
1970a,b), the early investigations on teleosts revealed mitotic activity in the adult
brain and defined some of the major brain areas (“matrix zones”) in which these
mitoses take place. However, the cell type(s) into which these new cells develop
remained elusive at that time.
Detailed analysis of the development of new cells in the adult teleostean brain
started in the 1970s and 1980s, particularly by relating cell proliferation in the optic
tectum to the continuing formation of new photoreceptor cells in the retina (Meyer
1978; Johns 1982). Most significantly, by ultrastructural examination of the ­progeny
of dividing tectal cells, evidence was obtained that adult-born cells in the teleostean
brain are capable of neuronal differentiation (Raymond and Easter 1983), thus
firmly establishing the study of adult neurogenesis in teleost fish.
More recent developments in the area of adult neurogenesis in teleost fish have
included detailed mappings and quantitative analysis of proliferative activity in the
brain of several species (Zupanc and Horschke 1995; Zikopoulos et al. 2000; Ekström
et  al. 2001; Zupanc et  al. 2005; Grandel et  al. 2006); demonstration of long-term
persistence, neuronal differentiation, and integration of the new nerve cells into
­existing neural networks (Zupanc and Zupanc 1992; Zupanc et al. 1996, 2005; Ott
et al. 1997; Hinsch and Zupanc 2007); isolation and characterization of stem cells as
the source of adult-born neurons and glial cells (Hinsch and Zupanc 2006); identification of apoptotic cell death as a regulator of the number of new cells (Soutschek and
Zupanc 1995, 1996), and discovery of chromosomal variability as a possible mechanism to regulate gene expression at a genomic level during postembryonic development of brain cells (Rajendran et al. 2007). Moreover, by application of well-defined
lesion paradigms, a close link has been demonstrated between adult neurogenesis in
the intact brain and the potential of teleost fish to regenerate nervous tissue after
injury by formation of new neurons (Hitchcock et al. 1992; Zupanc and Ott 1999).
A large number of proteins associated with this process of neuronal regeneration have
been identified by employing proteome analysis (Zupanc et al. 2006).
In the following chapter, I first describe the generation and development of new
cells in the intact brain of teleost fish. Then, based on a comparative analysis of
these findings, I discuss functional and evolutionary aspects of adult neurogenesis
in vertebrates. Finally, I review the significance of neurogenesis for brain repair in
teleosts, including recent attempts to identify regeneration-associated proteins on a
large scale by employment of proteome analysis.

5.2 Adult Neurogenesis
5.2.1 Rate of Cell Proliferation
A distinctive feature of adult neurogenesis in teleost fish is the enormous relative
number of new cells produced. Quantitative analysis based on labeling of S-phase
cells with the thymidine analogue 5-bromo-2¢-deoxyuridine (BrdU) has shown that

5  Adult Neurogenesis in Fish

139

in Apteronotus leptorhynchus, one of the best studied model systems, on average
100,000 cells are generated in the whole brain within any 2-h period (Zupanc and
Horschke 1995). In zebrafish, approximately 6,000 cells are born within any
30-min period (Hinsch and Zupanc 2007). These cell numbers correspond to
roughly 0.2% and 0.06% of the total population of brain cells in the respective
­species. Thus, the number of cells that enter the S-phase of mitosis per time unit,
relative to the total number of cells in the adult brain, appears to be similar in the
two species.
For comparison, in the subventricular zone of adult mice approximately 30,000
cells are formed every day (Lois and Alvarez-Buylla 1994); this corresponds to
0.03% of the estimated 110 million cells in the whole brain of adult mice (Williams
2000). The dentate gyrus of the hippocampus of adult rats gives rise to ­approximately
9,000 cells every day (Cameron and McKay 2001), corresponding to 0.003% of the
estimated 330 million cells in the whole brain of adult rats (Herculano-Houzel and
Lent 2005). Thus, the rate of cell proliferation in the adult teleostean brain is at least
one, if not two, orders of magnitude higher than in the adult mammalian brain.

5.2.2 Proliferation Zones
Another distinctive feature of adult neurogenesis in teleosts is the tremendous
­number of proliferations zones, small, well-defined areas of the brain in which
mitotic cell divisions occur at high rates. Many of these zones are found at or near
the surfaces of ventricles or related systems. Although other zones, particularly in
the cerebellum, are located in regions distant from any ventricle, at least some of
them are thought to be derived from areas located at ventricular surfaces during
embryonic stages of development. As a result of the everted development of the fish
brain during embryogenesis, the ventricular lumina associated with these areas are
obliterated and translocated (Pouwels 1978a,b).
Like the high overall rate of cell proliferation, the large number of proliferation
zones in the teleostean brain contrasts with the situation in mammals. In the latter
taxon, adult neurogenesis appears to be restricted to two brain areas: first, the
­anterior part of the subventricular zone of the lateral ventricle from which the
­immature neurons migrate via a so-called rostral migratory stream into the ­olfactory
bulb and differentiate into granule neurons and periglomerular interneurons (Altman
1969; Luskin 1993; Lois and Alvarez-Buylla 1994; Lois et al. 1996; Pencea et al.
2001; Sanai et al. 2004; Bédard and Parent 2004; Curtis et al. 2007); and second, the
subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus, from where the new cells migrate a short
distance into the granule cell layer of the hippocampus and develop into mature
granule neurons (Altman and Das 1965; Kaplan and Bell 1984; Eriksson et al. 1998;
Gould et al. 1999; Kornack and Rakic 1999; Seri et al. 2001).
By contrast, mapping studies have revealed dozens of proliferation zones in the
adult teleost fish brain (Figs. 5.1 and 5.2) (Kranz and Richter 1970a,b; Richter and
Kranz 1970a,b; Zupanc and Horschke 1995; Zikopoulos et al. 2000; Ekström et al.
2001; Zupanc et al. 2005; Grandel et al. 2006). Quantitative analysis has shown

a

e

ECL

Ctec

Cpost

PPv
TeO

ICL

GL

TL
TeV
PPd
FR

PGZ
(L3)

DiV

b

TPM

TPp
PGm

PGI

Dd

CP

DP

Chor
PGZ
(L1&2)

PTN

Dm

SY
Dl

TLa

VOT
Dc

DiV

ATN

TelV

DIL

LH

Chor

Vd

Dp

Hd

LR

LOT
ENd

Pit

Vv

MOT

Hv
Cantd

f

TeO
Ctec
PGZ
(L3)

c
PGZ
(L1&2)

Dm

Dl

TeV

TL

Valgra

TSc

Vas

TSvl

Cpost

Dc
Dp

Vp

MFB

NMLF

RT

LLF

TelV

FR
NR

TPM

PGm

NT
LFB

ENv

PPa

TGN

SG

TLa

DiV

Hc
DIL

DiV

OT
CO

Hd

Pit

LR

ON

g

PGZ
(L1&2)

Valgra
PGZ
(L3)

d

TL
Valmol

SD

Vammol

TSc
Hav
TeO

DOT

FR

CPN
PSp

I

Vamgra

NLV

TeO

LLF

VM

LFB

NLV

TTBc
TLa

SC
Cpop

NIn
CIL

CM

DIL
Chor

MLF

TMCa

MFB

VOT

TeV
NIII

NLL

PPp
DAO

DTN

PL
TTB

VL
DiV

PSm

TSvl

Ctec

LR
Hv

Hd

400 µm

Fig. 5.1  Proliferation zones in rostral divisions of the brain of adult zebrafish. The presence of these zones
has been revealed by analysis of 5-bromo-2¢-deoxyuridine (BrdU) labeling in transverse brain ­sections.
These sections were obtained through intraperitoneal injection of BrdU, followed by a postadministration
survival time of 2 h. Areas of mitotic activity are indicated by black dots. Their number correlates with the
number of BrdU-labeled cells in a semiquantitative manner. The chartings of the transverse sections correspond roughly to levels 31 (a), 85 (b), 107 (c), 127 (d), 153 (e), 168 (f), and 185 (g) of the zebrafish brain
atlas (Wullimann et al. 1996). ATN nucleus tuberis anterior (anterior tuberal nucleus), Cantd commissura
anterior, pars dorsalis (anterior commissure, dorsal part), Chor commissura horizontalis (horizontal commissure), CIL nucleus centralis lobi inferioris hypothalami (central nucleus of the inferior lobe), CM corpus
mamillare (mammillary body), CO chiasma opticum (optic chiasm), CP nucleus centralis posterior thalami
(central posterior thalamic nucleus), CPN nucleus praetectalis centralis (central pretectal nucleus), Cpop
commissura supraoptica = commissura postoptica (supraoptic commissure = postoptic commissure), Cpost
commissura posterior (posterior commissure), Ctec commissura tecti = commissura intertectalis (tectal

5  Adult Neurogenesis in Fish

141

­Fig. 5.1  (continued) commissure = intertectal commissure), Dc area dorsalis telencephali, zona centralis
(central zone of dorsal telencephalic area), Dd area dorsalis telencephali, zona dorsalis (dorsal zone of
dorsal telencephalic area), DIL nucleus diffusus lobi inferioris hypothalami (diffuse nucleus of the inferior lobe), DiV ventriculus diencephali (diencephalic ventricle), Dl area dorsalis telencephali, zona lateralis (lateral zone of dorsal ­telencephalic area), Dm area dorsalis telencephali, zona medialis (medial
zone of dorsal telencephalic area), DOT tractus opticus dorsomedialis (dorsomedial optic tract), Dp area
dorsalis telencephali, zona posterior (posterior zone of dorsal telencephalic area), DP nucleus dorsalis
posterior thalami (dorsal posterior thalamic nucleus), DTN nucleus tegmentalis dorsalis (dorsal tegmental
nucleus), DV radix descendens nervi trigemini (descending trigeminal root), ECL stratum cellulare externum bulbi olfactorii (external cellular layer of olfactory bulb), EG eminentia granularis (granular eminence), ENd nucleus entopeduncularis, pars dorsalis (entopeduncular nucleus, dorsal part), ENv nucleus
entopeduncularis, pars ventralis (entopeduncular nucleus, ventral part), FR fasciculus retroflexus = tractus
habenulointerpeduncularis (habenulo-interpeduncular tract), GL stratum glomerulosum bulbi olfactorii
(glomerular layer of olfactory bulb), Hav nucleus habenularis ventralis (ventral habenular nucleus), Hc
nucleus periventricularis hypothalami, zona caudalis (caudal zone of periventricular hypothalamus), Hd
nucleus periventricularis hypothalami, zona dorsalis (dorsal zone of periventricular hypothalamus),
Hv nucleus periventricularis hypothalami, zona ventralis (ventral zone of periventricular hypothalamus),
I nucleus intermedius thalami (intermediate thalamic nucleus), IAF fibrae arcuatae internae (inner arcuate
fibers), ICL stratum cellulare internum bulbi olfactorii (internal cellular layer of olfactory bulb), LFB
fasciculus lateralis telencephali (lateral forebrain bundle), LH nucleus lateralis hypothalami (lateral hypothalamic nucleus), LLF fasciculus longitudinalis lateralis = lemniscus lateralis (lateral longitudinal fascicle = lateral lemniscus), LOT tractus olfactorius lateralis (lateral olfactory tract), LR recessus lateralis
(lateral recess of diencephalic ventricle), MFB fasciculus medialis telencephali (medial forebrain bundle),
MLF fasciculus longitudinalis medialis (medial longitudinal fascicle), MOT tractus olfactorius medialis
(medial olfactory tract), NLL nucleus lemnisci lateralis (nucleus of the lateral lemniscus), NLV nucleus
lateralis valvulae (nucleus lateralis valvulae), NMLF nucleus fasciculi longitudinalis medialis (nucleus of
the medial longitudinal fascicle), NT nucleus taeniae (nucleus taeniae), NIII nucleus nervi oculomotorii
(oculomotor nucleus), ON nervus opticus (optic nerve), OT tractus opticus (optic tract), PGI nucleus
praeglomerulosus lateralis (lateral preglomerular nucleus), PGm nucleus praeglomerulosus medialis
(medial preglomerular nucleus), PGZ (L1 & 2) stratum periventriculare tecti optici, laminae 1 and 2 (layers 1 & 2 of periventricular gray zone of optic tectum), PGZ (L3) stratum periventriculare tecti optici,
lamina 3 (layer 3 of periventricular gray zone of optic tectum), Pit hypophysis = glandula pituitaria (hypophysis = pituitary), PL nucleus perilemniscularis (perilemniscal nucleus), PPa nucleus praeopticus parvocellularis, pars anterior (parvocellular preoptic nucleus, anterior part), PPd nucleus praetectalis
periventricularis, pars dorsalis (periventricular pretectal nucleus, dorsal part), PPp nucleus praeopticus parvocellularis, pars posterior (parvocellular preoptic nucleus, posterior part), PPv nucleus praetectalis periventricularis, pars ventralis (periventricular pretectal nucleus, ventral part), PSm nucleus
praetectalis superficialis, pars magnocellularis (magnocellular superficial pretectal nucleus), PSp
nucleus praetectalis superficialis, pars parvocellularis (parvocellular superficial pretectal nucleus),
PTN nucleus tuberis posterior (posterior tuberal nucleus), SC nucleus suprachiasmaticus (suprachiasmatic
nucleus), SD saccus dorsalis (dorsal sac), SY sulcus ypsiloniformis (ypsiloniform sulcus), TelV ventriculi
telencephali (telencephalic ventricles), TeO tectum opticum (optic tectum), TeV ventriculus mesencephali
(tectal ventricle), TGN nucleus gustatorius tertius (tertiary gustatory nucleus), TL torus longitudinalis
(longitudinal torus), TLa torus lateralis (lateral torus), TMCa tractus mesencephalocerebellaris anterior
(anterior mesencephalocerebellar tract), TPM tractus praetectomamillaris (pretecto-mammillary tract),
TPp nucleus periventricularis tuberculi posterioris (periventricular nucleus of posterior tuberculum), TSc
nucleus centralis tori semicircularis (central nucleus of semicircular torus), TSvl nucleus ventrolateralis
tori semicircularis (ventrolateral nucleus of semicircular torus), TTB tractus tectobulbaris (tecto-bulbar
tract), TTBc tractus tectobulbaris cruciatus (crossed tecto-bulbar tract), Valgra valvula cerebelli, pars lateralis, stratum granulosum (granular layer of the lateral part of the valvula cerebelli), Valmol valvula cerebelli, pars medialis, stratum moleculare (molecular layer of the lateral part of the valvula cerebelli),
Vamgra valvula cerebelli, pars medialis, stratum granulosum (granular layer of the medial part of the valvula cerebelli), Vammol valvula cerebelli, pars medialis, stratum moleculare (molecular layer of the medial
part of the valvula cerebelli), Vas lacuna vasculosa areae postremae (vascular lacuna of area postrema),
Vd area ventralis telencephali, nucleus dorsalis (dorsal nucleus of ventral telencephalic area), Vl area
ventralis telencepahli, nucleus lateralis (lateral nucleus of ventral telencephalic area), VL nucleus ventrolateralis thalami (ventrolateral thalamic nucleus), VM nucleus ventromedialis thalami (ventromedial
­thalamic nucleus), VOT tractus opticus ventrolateralis (ventrolateral optic tract), Vp area ventralis telencephali, nucleus postcommissuralis (postcommissural nucleus of ventral telencephalic area), Vv area ventralis
telencephali, nucleus ventralis (ventral nucleus of ventral telencephalic area). (From Zupanc et al. 2005)

142

G.K.H. Zupanc

a

c

CCemol

LCamol
LCagra

CCegra
TeO

Ccer

PGZ
PC

RV

Vmd

MA

Cven
LLF

NVmv

SGT

VIIs LVII
NDV
DON
RV
DV

PLLN

GC

Vs
VII+ALLN

MON

NVs

EG

NVmd

RV

CC

SGT
VIII

MLF

TBS

IMRF

DON

MLF

SRF
TTBr
TTBc

b

CCemol

CCegra

EG

LCamol

LCagra

MON
ALLN

DV

VIII

NXm RV
DV
X

Cven
T SGT MLF
IMRF

LVII

CON

SO MA
MLF
IAF

MaON

LX

RV

CC
VIIs

d

SGT

TBS

MA
IRF

TVS

MLF IR
IO

NVIc
VIc

TTBc

400 µm

Fig. 5.2  Proliferation zones in caudal divisions of the brain of adult zebrafish. The presence of
these zones has been revealed by analysis of BrdU labeling in transverse brain sections at postadministration survival times of 2  h. Areas of mitotic activity are indicated by black dots. Their
number correlates with the number of BrdU-labeled cells in a semiquantitative manner. The chartings of the transverse sections correspond roughly to levels 219 (a), 237 (b), 260 (c), and 283 (d)
of the zebrafish brain atlas (Wullimann et al. 1996). ALLN nervi lineae lateralis anterioris (anterior
lateral line nerves), CC crista cerebellaris (cerebellar crest), CCegra corpus cerebelli, stratum
granulosum (granular layer of cerebellar corpus), CCemol corpus cerebelli, stratum moleculare
(molecular layer of cerebellar corpus), Ccer commissura cerebelli (cerebellar commissure), CON
nucleus octavolateralis caudalis (caudal octavolateralis nucleus), Cven commissura ventralis
rhombencephali (ventral rhombencephalic commissure), DON nucleus octavus descendens
(descending octaval nucleus), DV radix descendens nervi trigemini (descending trigeminal root),
EG eminentia granularis (granular eminence), GC griseum centrale (central gray), IAF fibrae
arcuatae internae (inner arcuate fibers), IMRF formatio reticularis, pars intermedia (intermediate
reticular formation), IO oliva inferior (inferior olive), IR nucleus raphes inferior (inferior raphe),
IRF formatio reticularis, pars inferior (inferior reticular formation), LCagra lobus caudalis cerebelli, stratum granulosum (granular layer of caudal lobe of cerebellum), LCamol lobus caudalis
cerebelli, stratum moleculare (molecular layer of caudal lobe of cerebellum), LLF fasciculus
longitudinalis lateralis = lemniscus lateralis (lateral longitudinal fascicle = lateral lemniscus), LVII
lobus facialis (facial lobe), LX lobus vagus (vagal lobe), MA fibra Mauthneri (Mauthner axon),
MaON nucleus octavus magnocellularis (magnocellular octaval nucleus), MLF fasciculus

5  Adult Neurogenesis in Fish

143

that the majority of the new brain cells are generated in the cerebellum (Zupanc
and Horschke 1995; Hinsch and Zupanc 2007). In two of the three cerebellar
subdivisions – the corpus cerebelli and the valvula cerebelli – the proliferation
zones are located in specific areas within the molecular layers. In the third cerebellar
subdivision, the eminentia granularis, the new cells are generated in a granular
layer called the eminentia granularis pars medialis or the lobus caudalis.
The cells that are not produced in the cerebellum arise from various regions of
the telencephalon, diencephalon, mesencephalon, and rhombencephalon. Among
the latter, two are of particular interest from a comparative point of view: the olfactory bulb and the lateral and posterior zones of the dorsal telencephalon. Based both
on neuroanatomical evidence (Northcutt and Braford 1980; Nieuwenhuys and Meek
1990; Braford 1995; Northcutt 1995; Butler 2000; Vargas et al. 2000) and on the
results of functional studies (Rodríguez et al. 2002; Portavella et al. 2004), part of
the dorsolateral telencephalon is thought to be homologous to the mammalian hippocampus. These results have led to the conclusion that adult neurogenesis in the
olfactory bulb and the hippocampus is a conserved vertebrate trait (Zupanc 2006b).

5.2.3 Adult Stem Cells
The new cells in the adult teleostean brain originate from cells with stem cell-like
properties. Isolation of such cells from the proliferation zones in the dorsal telencephalon and the cerebellum, followed by examination in culture, have revealed
some of their properties (Hinsch and Zupanc 2006). After 3–4 days in culture, these
cells give rise to neurospheres that grow through cell proliferation and reach
­diameters of as much as 140 mm within 3 weeks. Growth of the neurospheres can
Fig. 5.2  (continued) longitudinalis medialis (medial longitudinal fascicle), MON nucleus octavo­
lateralis medialis (medial octavolateralis nucleus), NDV nucleus descendens nervi trigemini
(nucleus of the descending trigeminal root), NVmd nucleus motorius nervi trigemini, pars dorsalis
(trigeminal motor nucleus, dorsal part), NVmv nucleus motorius nervi trigemini, pars ventralis
(trigeminal motor nucleus, ventral part), NVs nucleus sensorius principalis nervi trigemini (primary
sensory trigeminal nucleus), NVIc nucleus nervi abducentis, pars caudalis (abducens nucleus,
caudal part), NXm nucleus motorius nervi vagi (vagal motor nucleus), PC tractus cerebellaris
posterior (posterior cerebellar tract), PGZ stratum periventriculare tecti optici (periventricular gray
zone of optic tectum), PLLN nervus lineae lateralis posterioris (posterior lateral line nerve), RV
ventriculus rhombencephali (rhombencephalic ventricle), SGT tractus gustatorius secundarius
(secondary gustatory tract), SO populatio octavia secundaria (secondary octaval population), SRF
formatio reticularis, pars superior (superior reticular formation), T nucleus tangentialis (tangential
nucleus), TBS tractus bulbospinalis (bulbo-spinal tract), TeO tectum opticum (optic tectum), TTBc
tractus tectobulbaris cruciatus (crossed tecto-bulbar tract), TTBr tractus tectobulbaris rectus
(uncrossed tecto-bulbar tract), TVS tractus vestibulospinalis (vestibulo-spinal tract), Vmd radix
motoria nervi trigemini, pars dorsalis (dorsal motor root of the trigeminal nerve), Vs radix sensoria
nervi trigemini (sensory root of the trigeminal nerve), VIc radix caudalis nervi abducentis (caudal
root of the abducens nerve), VII nervus facialis (facial nerve), VIIs radix sensoria nervi facialis
(sensory root of the facial nerve), VIII nervus octavus (octaval nerve), X nervus vagus (vagal nerve).
(From Zupanc et al. 2005)

144

G.K.H. Zupanc

Fig.  5.3  Progeny of adult stem cells isolated from the brain of Apteronotus leptorhynchus.
Differentiation was induced by plating neurospheres onto a laminin-coated surface and cultivating
them in medium containing fetal bovine serum. Approximately 24 h after plating, the cells started
to differentiate into various cell types. (a) Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)-immunoreactive
astrocyte. (b) Vimentin-positive cell. (c) Hu-expressing neurons. (d) Microtubule-associated
protein 2 (MAP2) (2a + 2b)-immunopositive neuron. Nuclei were stained with either propidium
iodide (red) or 4'6-diamidino-2-phenylindole-dihydrochloride (DAPI) (blue). Note absence of
immunolabeling in some cells in (c) and (d). (From Hinsch and Zupanc 2006)

be promoted by epidermal growth factor and basic fibroblast growth factor.
Differentiation is induced by exposing the neurospheres to fetal bovine serum and
laminin as a coating substrate. Under the latter conditions, cells from neurospheres
develop into both neurons and glial cells (Fig.  5.3). Because, in addition to this
multipotency, the cells isolated from the proliferation zones in the adult brain
exhibit the ability for self-renewal, they can be regarded true stem cells.

5.2.4 Migration and Guidance of the Young Cells
Depending on their site of origin, the young cells show either of two major types
of behavior during subsequent development. In a number of brain regions, they
migrate only a short distance to reside near the area where they were born. In the
retina, for example, new cells originate from an annulus of progenitor cells at the
junction of the retina and the iris. These progenitors generate neurons that are

5  Adult Neurogenesis in Fish

145

c­ ontinuously added appositionally to the margin at the extant retina (Johns and
Easter 1977; Meyer 1978; Hagedorn and Fernald 1992; Marcus et  al. 1999).
Similarly, in the optic tectum – the projection target of the retinal ganglion cells in
teleosts – the majority of the new cells are generated at the caudal pole, where they
remain during their subsequent development (Raymond and Easter 1983; MansourRobaey and Pinganaud 1990; Nguyen et  al. 1999; Wullimann and Puelles 1999;
Ekström et al. 2001; Candal et al. 2005; Zupanc et al. 2005). As a result, the optic
tectum grows asymmetrically by expanding primarily from its caudal end.
By contrast, in other brain areas, the young cells migrate from their proliferation
zones over relatively long distances to specific target areas. In the corpus cerebelli
and the valvula cerebelli, the new cells are generated in specific proliferation zones
in the respective molecular layers. Subsequently, the young cells migrate into the
associated granular layers where they spread out evenly (Zupanc et al. 1996, 2005)
(Fig. 5.4). Thus, both corpus cerebelli and valvula cerebelli grow in a rather symmetrical fashion.
Radial glial fibers appear to be involved in the long-distance migration by guidance of the young cells, at least in some brain areas (Zupanc and Clint 2003). In
both the corpus cerebelli and the valvula cerebelli, such fibers, characterized by
their immunoreactivity against vimentin and/or glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP), delineate the migratory path taken by the young cerebellar cells. These
fibers could provide a scaffolding for the migrating cells, as suggested by doublelabeling experiments. A few days after labeling of S-phase cells with BrdU, many
of them can be seen in close apposition to GFAP-labeled radial glial fibers. The
somata of these cells are distinguished by their elongated morphology (Fig. 5.5), a
feature characteristic of migrating cells, as shown during both embryogenesis
(Rakic 1971, 1972; Gregory et al. 1988) and adult stages of development (AlvarezBuylla and Nottebohm 1988).

5.2.5 Regulation of Cell Numbers by Apoptotic Cell Death
Quantitative analysis has shown that in the various subdivisions of the cerebellum
the number of the new cells drops to half their initial value a few weeks after these
cells have arrived at their final target areas, the corresponding granular layers
(Zupanc et al. 1996; Ott et al. 1997). Subsequent experiments employing terminal
deoxynucleotidyl-transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end-labeling (TUNEL)
of 3¢-OH ends of DNA demonstrated that this drop is caused by apoptotic cell death
(Soutschek and Zupanc 1996). Further, the number of apoptotic cells is manifold
larger in the granule cell layers than in the corresponding molecular layers. Taken
together, these findings suggest that apoptosis is used as a mechanism to regulate
the number of young cells after they have reached their target areas. A similar
observation has been made in the teleostean retina during postembryonic development. Apoptotic cell death occurs predominantly in areas where the new cells differentiate and become integrated into visual circuits (Candal et al. 2005).

146

G.K.H. Zupanc

2 hours

2 days
TeO

TeO

TL

TL
Valmol

Valmol
Vammol

Vammol
Valgra

Valgra

TeV

Vamgra

TeV

Vamgra

5 days

10 days

TeO

TeO
TL

TL

Valmol

Valmol
Vammol

Valgra

Vammol
Valgra

TeV

Vamgra

TeV

Vamgra

125 days
TeO
TL
Valmol
Vammol
Valgra

TeV

Vamgra

200 µm

Fig.  5.4  Schematic representation of the distribution of BrdU-labeled cells in the valvula
­cerebelli of zebrafish after various post-BrdU administration survival times. The location of
labeled cells is indicated by black dots. The number of dots roughly represents the density of
labeled cells in this brain region. TeO tectum opticum, TeV tectal ventricle, TL torus longitudinalis,
Valgra granule cell layer of the lateral division of the valvula cerebelli, Valmol molecular layer of the
lateral division of the valvula cerebelli, Vamgra granule cell layer of the medial division of the
valvula cerebelli, Vammol molecular layer of the medial division of the valvula cerebelli. Bar
200 mm. (From Zupanc et al. 2005)

Studies in mammals have shown that during embryonic development apoptosis
leads to the elimination of young cells, which, after arrival at the target site, have
failed to make proper connections with other neurons and to receive adequate
amounts of specific survival factors produced by cells in the target area (Raff 1992;
Raff et al. 1993). Although not yet examined in the context of adult ­neurogenesis,
it is possible that a similar mechanism regulates the number of cells born in the
adult brain.

5  Adult Neurogenesis in Fish

147

Fig. 5.5  Guidance of young cells by radial glial fibers in the cerebellum of A. leptorhynchus.
Two days after the administration of BrdU, the fish was killed, and the transverse section
through the dorsal portion of the corpus cerebelli was immunostained against both BrdU (red
color) and GFAP (green color). Long GFAP-positive radial glial fascicles run at the midline of
the molecular layer (mol) through the so-called dorsal tip (asterisk) into the granule cell layer
(gra). Several BrdU-labeled cells, indicated by arrowheads, are closely apposed to the radial
glial fibers. (From Zupanc 2001)

148

G.K.H. Zupanc

5.2.6 Long-Term Persistence of New Cells and Permanent
Brain Growth
Long-term persistence of the cells generated in the adult teleostean brain has been
­demonstrated in both A. leptorhynchus and zebrafish. In each of the two species,
approximately half the initially generated cells survive at least for several hundreds
of days and likely for the rest of the fish’s life expectancy (Ott et al. 1997; Zupanc
et  al. 2005; Hinsch and Zupanc 2007). In mammals, persistence of brain cells
­generated ­during adulthood has been shown in both the hippocampus and the
­olfactory bulb (Kaplan et  al. 1985; Corotto et  al. 1993; Winner et  al. 2002;
Kempermann et al. 2003).
In A. leptorhynchus, quantitative analysis has demonstrated that the long-term
survival, together with the continuous production of new cells, leads to a permanent
growth of the entire brain, except for very old fish in which the growth rate appears
to reach a plateau; this parallels the continuous growth of the body in this species.
While the body weight of the fish increases from 1 to 16 g, the total number of brain
cells doubles from 5 × 107 to 1 × 108 (Zupanc and Horschke 1995).

5.2.7 Neuronal Differentiation
Experiments in zebrafish have shown that approximately 50% of all adult-born
cells that survive long term express the neuron-specific protein Hu (Zupanc et al.
2005; Hinsch and Zupanc 2007). Such neurons are particularly abundant in the
dorsal telencephalon, including the region presumably homologous to the mammalian hippocampus, but are also found in other areas of the adult brain.
Further experiments in which BrdU immunohistochemistry was combined with
retrograde tract tracing have shown that in the cerebellum of A. leptorhynchus and
zebrafish at least part of the young cells develop into granule cell neurons (Zupanc et al.
1996, 2005). As in these studies the BrdU-labeled granule cells were retrogradely traced
by application of tracer substance to the molecular layers, the experiments also indicate
that these cells have developed axons traveling from their somata in the granule cell
layers to the corresponding molecular layers to form the parallel fiber network. Thus, it
is reasonable to assume that they have integrated into the existing neural network of
cerebellar neurons. However, it is unknown whether the axons of the newly generated
granule cells make proper synaptic connections with other cells, such as Purkinje cells.
It also remains to be examined whether the new granule cells are functional and whether
their physiological ­properties are similar to those of the “older” granule cells.

5.2.8 Genomic Regulation of the Development of the New Cells
How are cellular proliferation and the subsequent development of new brain cells
regulated? Traditionally, it was thought that the mechanisms mediating these

5  Adult Neurogenesis in Fish

149

p­ rocesses operate on a constant genome and are restricted to alterations at
­transcriptional and posttranslational levels. However, chromosomal analysis of new
cells in the brain of both mammals and teleost fish has provided evidence for somatic
genomic alterations through loss and gain of whole chromosomes (Rehen et al. 2001,
2005; Osada et  al. 2002; Kaushal et  al. 2003; Yurov et  al. 2005; Rajendran et  al.
2007). Such alterations result in a genetic mosaic of the new cells and, thus, in a likely
modification of expression levels of genes residing on the affected chromosomes.
In A. leptorhynchus, only 22% of all cells generated in the adult brain display
the euploid set of chromosomes, assumed to be 22 (Rajendran et  al. 2007)
(Fig. 5.6a–d). The remaining cells exhibit numerical chromosomal abnormalities.
In most of these aneuploid cells, approximately 84%, loss of chromosomes is
observed, whereas chromosome gain is encountered in the remaining 16% of the
cells. Not only single chromosomes but also multiple chromosomes may be lost
or gained. In the most extreme cases found, up to 16 chromosomes have been lost
and up to 12 chromosomes gained, relative to the euploid number of 22 chromosomes. As in other species and tissues, aneuploidy among adult-born brain cells in
A. leptorhynchus can be accounted for by segregation defects during mitotic
division. Such defects include laggards, anaphase bridges, and micronuclei
(Rajendran et al. 2007; Zupanc et al. 2009) (Fig. 5.6e–k).
Despite the pronounced variation from the euploid set of chromosomes, aneuploidy
in A. leptorhynchus does not necessarily result in death of the individual aneuploid
cells and in dysfunction of the whole animal. Examination of such cells has shown that
a significant number of them can persist long term and develop into neurons (Rajendran
et al. 2008; Zupanc et al. 2009). This finding suggests that at least some of the aneuploid cells generated in the adult teleostean brain are competent to develop normally.

5.3 Toward a Functional and Evolutionary Understanding
of Adult Neurogenesis in Fish: The Numerical
Matching Hypothesis
Why does neurogenesis cease in all but two regions of the mammalian brain at the time
of, or shortly after, birth, but persist throughout life in numerous regions of the teleost
fish brain? A possible answer is given by a comparative analysis of the differences in
the development of motor structures and sensory organs between teleosts and mammals
(Zupanc 1999, 2001, 2006a,b, 2008a,b, 2009). Although many species of teleosts and
mammals grow during postembryonic stages of development and even throughout life,
there is a distinct difference in the growth pattern between these two taxonomic classes.
In mammals, postembryonic growth is the result of an increase in size but not in number
of individual muscle fibers (Rowe and Goldspink 1969), whereas in fish both the number of muscle fibers and the volume of individual fibers increase (Weatherley and Gill
1985; Fine 1989; Koumans and Akster 1995; Zimmerman and Lowery 1999; for
review, see Rowlerson and Veggetti 2001). It is, therefore, possible that the hyperplasia
of peripheral motor elements prompts a concomitant increase in the number of central
neurons involved in neural control of associated muscle activity (Fig. 5.7).

150

30

b

Apteronotus SR 9 (n=281)

Relative frequency (%)

Relative frequency (%)

a

G.K.H. Zupanc

25
20
15
10
5
0
1

6

11

16

21

26

31

Apteronotus SR 22 (n=274)

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

36

1

6

Number of chromosomes

d

Apteronotus SR 23 (n=325)
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1

6

11

16

21

26

Number of chromosomes

16

21

26

31

36

Number of chromosomes

Relative frequency (%)

Relative frequency (%)

c

11

31

36

Apteronotus SR 25 (n=267)

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

1

6

11

16

21

26

31

36

Number of chromosomes

e

f

g

h

i

k

5 µm

Fig.  5.6  (a–d) Chromosome number histograms based on analysis of metaphase chromosome
spreads of cells from whole adult brains of four individual fish of A. leptorhynchus. Between 17%
and 28% of the cells are euploid, having 22 chromosomes. Among the aneuploid cells, the majority lost chromosomes, whereas a rather minor portion gained chromosomes. n, number of cells
analyzed. (e–k) High-power images obtained through deconvolution microscopy of phosphorylated histone-H3-labeled cells (red) in the molecular layer of the corpus cerebelli. The nuclei were
counterstained with DAPI (blue). (e–g) Morphologically normal metaphase profile. (h–k)
Prometaphase/metaphase profile with single laggard. Note the clear gap between the laggard and
the daughter nucleus (arrows). In addition to the phosphorylated histone-H3 label (e, h) and the
DAPI counterstain (f, i), the overlay (g, k) is shown. (After Rajendran et al. 2007)

5  Adult Neurogenesis in Fish

Peripheral
elements

151

Central
elements

Ratio
9:1

Peripheral
elements

Central
elements

Ratio
9:1

Fig.  5.7  The numerical matching hypothesis. This hypothesis makes predictions about the
relationship between peripheral elements, such as muscle fibers or sensory receptor cells, and
central elements in the brain involved in motor control of these muscle fibers, or in processing of
sensory information received through these receptors, during growth. A number of observations
suggest that the ratio of the corresponding peripheral elements and central elements is highly
constant and maintained when the number of peripheral elements changes (here, an increase in the
number of peripheral elements from 9 to 18 is shown). Hyperplasia of peripheral motor elements,
or increase in the number of peripheral sensory elements, therefore, prompts a concomitant
increase in the number of the corresponding central neurons. Because such growth through
addition of new peripheral elements to the population of existing ones is characteristic of teleost
fish, but largely absent in adult mammals, the numerical matching hypothesis can explain the
difference in the extent of adult neurogenesis between teleosts and mammals. (From Zupanc 2008b)

Along similar lines, the number of sensory receptor cells, receptor organs, or
receptor units in the periphery increases with age, as has been shown in several
species of fish. Such a formation of new sensory elements has been demonstrated
for sensory hair cells in the inner ear and the lateral line system of various species
(Janssen et al. 1987; Corwin 1981; Higgs et al. 2002); for retinal cells in the eyes
of goldfish (Johns and Easter 1977); and for electrosensory receptor organs in the
gymnotiform fish Sternopygus dariensis (Zakon 1984). Thus, similar to the formation of new motor elements, the continuous increase in the number of sensory
elements in fish may lead to the generation of new neurons involved in the processing of sensory information, ensuring a numerical matching of central neurons
and peripheral sensory elements.
In fish, the matching hypothesis can explain the enormous mitotic activity in the
cerebellum. Based on anatomical, physiological, and behavioral experiments, the
cerebellum, notably of weakly electric fish, has been proposed to play an important
role not only in the well-established function of control and coordination of movements but also in sensory processing. The latter has been demonstrated particularly
in the context of the involvement of the cerebellum in tracking movements of
objects around the animal and in the generation and subtraction of sensory expectations (for reviews, see Paulin 1993; Bell et al. 1997). On the other hand, the lack of

152

G.K.H. Zupanc

adult neurogenesis in the mammalian cerebellum could be causally linked to the
absence of changes in the number of muscle fibers and sensory elements during
periods of growth in the periphery.
Numerical matching between source and target populations of neurons has been
demonstrated at the central level of the cerebellum. In wild-type mice, the ratio
between the number of granule cells, or neurons of the inferior olive, and their
postsynaptic target, the Purkinje cells, is remarkably constant. Genetically induced
degeneration of Purkinje cells causes a decrease in the number of granule cells and
olivary neurons such that the characteristic ratio of the respective presynaptic neuron population and the population of postsynaptic neurons is maintained (Wetts and
Herrup 1983; Herrup and Sunter 1987; Herrup et al. 1996).
In fish, there is some experimental evidence supporting the hypothesis that
changes in the number of peripheral sensory elements lead to changes in the production of the corresponding central elements. Raymond et  al. (1983) found in
goldfish that permanent removal of the optic input by enucleation of the eye results
in sustained depression of mitotic activity in the tectal proliferation zone on the
denervated side compared to the intact one. Temporary denervation by optic nerve
crush initially has a similar effect, but upon reinnervation of the tectum by the
regenerating optic fibers, proliferation is enhanced on the experimental side compared to the control side.
The core idea of the matching hypothesis, that is, that changes in the number
of peripheral motor or sensory elements are causal to alterations in the number of
central elements associated with these peripheral elements, can also explain why,
in the course of phylogenetic development, adult neurogenesis became restricted to
the olfactory bulb and the hippocampus in mammals. These two brain regions are
involved in processing of olfactory information perceived by primary sensory cells
in the olfactory epithelium. The latter is the only sensory structure in which the
primary sensory cells are continuously produced throughout adult life (Graziadei
and Graziadei 1979). These new cells replace older olfactory neurons that undergo
apoptosis (Magrassi and Graziadei 1995).
The axons of the primary sensory neurons make synaptic contacts with dendrites
of mitral and tufted cells within the olfactory bulb. These cells project to the olfactory cortex, including the lateral entorhinal cortex. The latter structure, in turn,
sends axons, via the lateral perforant path, to the hippocampus, which synapse on
the distal dendrites of the dentate gyrus granule cells (Carlsen et al. 1982; Insausti
et al. 2002; van Groen et al. 2002, 2003). Thus, each of the two regions in which
neurogenesis occurs within the adult mammalian brain – olfactory bulb and dentate
gyrus – is part of the central olfactory pathway. Remarkably, also the entorhinal
cortex, in which adult neurogenesis is absent, retains its neurogenic potential during
adult life. Neurospheres from this region differentiate into neurons and glia in vitro
and after transplantation to the adult dentate gyrus (Fontana et al. 2006).
It is assumed that the primary sensory cells in the olfactory epithelium exhibit
just a turnover, instead of a net increase in total number. Nevertheless, it is in
­agreement with the matching hypothesis that the continuous generation of a
­subpopulation of these sensory cells leads to a production of new central neurons

5  Adult Neurogenesis in Fish

153

(directly or indirectly) connected to them, whereas the degeneration of older
sensory cells is accompanied by secondary degeneration of central neurons linked
to the latter. In such cases, the overall number of peripheral elements and central
neurons would vary little, or not at all, over time, although changes in the number
of sensory cells or muscle fibers still trigger changes in the number of central
neurons so that a specific ratio between the two cellular populations is maintained.
A likely scenario of the phylogenetic development of adult neurogenesis in the
vertebrate brain is that this phenomenon constitutes a primitive trait which already
existed some 400 million years ago in the common evolutionary ancestors shared
by modern mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians (all of which belong to the taxonomic group of the Sarcopterygii), and ray-finned fishes (Actinopterygii). A major
function of this trait has been to ensure a constant ratio of motor (sensory) elements
versus central elements within motor (sensory) pathways when the number of
peripheral elements grows. However, as soon as the pattern of muscle growth
shifted from hyperplasia more toward hypertrophy in the course of the evolution of
mammals, the neurogenic potential of brain structures forming part of the motor
pathway was reduced in parallel. A similar reduction in the number of neurogenic
brain regions and in the rate of neurogenesis occurred when the formation of new
sensory cells was more and more abandoned. According to this hypothesis, neurogenesis would have continued only in the olfactory bulb and the hippocampus as a
consequence of the continued mitotic activity in the olfactory epithelium.

5.4 Neuronal Regeneration
The phenomenon of adult neurogenesis is closely related to a second phenomenon
by which teleosts are distinguished from amniote vertebrates: the ability to replace
neurons lost to injury in the adult central nervous system by newly generated ones
(Anderson et al. 1983, 1987; Hitchcock et al. 1992; Zupanc and Ott 1999; Cameron
2000; Takeda et al. 2008). This potential, commonly referred to as neuronal regeneration, has been particularly well studied in three neuronal systems: the retina and
its primary projection target, the optic tectum (for review, see Otteson and
Hitchcock 2003); the spinal cord (for review, see Waxman and Anderson 1986;
Sîrbulescu and Zupanc in press); and the cerebellum (for reviews, see Zupanc 1999,
2001, 2006a,b, 2008a,b, 2009; Zupanc and Clint 2003; Zupanc and Zupanc 2006a).
In the following, I focus on the latter system, which is based on a series of investigations carried out in A. leptorhynchus.

5.4.1 The Lesion Paradigm
The study of neuronal regeneration in the cerebellum has greatly benefitted from
the availability of a well-defined lesion paradigm in A. leptorhynchus (Fig.  5.8)
(Zupanc et al. 1998). This paradigm takes advantage of the prominent position of

154

G.K.H. Zupanc

a
CCb

TeO
EGp

Tel

SC
BS
1 mm

b

CCb-mol (d)

CCb-gra

TeO

CCb-mol (v)
TL
VCb-gra

VCb-mol

500 µm

Fig. 5.8  The cerebellar lesion paradigm. (a) Side view of the brain of A. leptorhynchus. Cerebellar
lesions are applied by puncturing the skull of the fish with a surgical blade in a defined location of
the head, thus generating a stab wound in one hemisphere in the rostral part of the corpus cerebelli
(CCb). (b) Transverse section through the corpus cerebelli taken at the level indicated by the arrow
in (a). The lesion path (arrowheads) travels through the dorsal molecular layer [CCb-mol(d)] and
the granular layer (CCb-gra) roughly halfway between the midline of the brain and the lateral edge
of the granular layer. BS brainstem, CCb-mol(v) ventral molecular layer of corpus cerebelli, EGp
eminentia granularis pars posterior, SC spinal cord, Tel telencephalon, TeO optic tectum, TL torus
longitudinalis, VCb-gra granule cell layer of valvula cerebelli, VCb-mol molecular layer of valvula
cerebelli. (From Zupanc and Zupanc 2006a)

the corpus cerebelli, which forms a roof on top of the brain, except over the
telencephalon. Cerebellar lesions can, therefore, be made in a defined way by
puncturing the skull of the anesthetized fish with a sterile surgical blade, without
damaging other parts of the brain. Guided by landmarks on the fish’s head, lesions
are applied in a defined way, resulting in an approximately 1-mm-deep cut traveling
in parasagittal direction and encompassing both the dorsal molecular layer and the
granular layer of the corpus cerebelli.

5  Adult Neurogenesis in Fish

155

Apoptosis
Calbindin-D28k
Microglia/macrophages
Generation of cells recruited at the lesion site
GFAP-positive radial glia fibers
Arrival of young cells

0
Lesion
applied

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

Post-lesioning survival time (hours)

Fig. 5.9  Schematic diagram of the time course of six major processes occurring in response to
mechanical lesions applied to the corpus cerebelli of A. leptorhynchus. From top, these are (1)
increase in number of apoptotic cells at and near lesion site (Zupanc et al. 1998); (2) upregulation
of calbindin-D28k as a putative survival-promoting factor in the area of the lesion (Zupanc and
Zupanc 2006b); (3) increase in density of microglia/macrophages throughout the corpus cerebelli
(Zupanc et al. 2003); (4) generation of new cells recruited to the site of lesion 28 days after the
injury (Zupanc and Ott 1999) (note that even cells born up to 2 days before the injury participate
in the process of neuronal regeneration); (5) increase in density of GFAP-positive radial glia fibers
at and near the site of lesion (Clint and Zupanc 2001); and (6) arrival of young cells at site of
lesion (Clint and Zupanc 2001). The first slope of each bar represents the time period during
which the event shows an increase from background levels. The shaded area represents the peak
period of the event. The second slope represents the time period during which the event decreases
to background levels. (From Zupanc 2008b)

Nissl stains of sections taken through the area of such lesions after various
postlesion survival times have indicated that neuronal tissue is restored within a few
weeks following the injury (Zupanc et al. 1998). This enormous regenerative potential is mediated by a number of well-orchestrated processes, which are discussed in
detail below. The time course of several of the major processes is schematically
indicated in Fig. 5.9.

5.4.2 Apoptotic Cell Death
The first event observed as part of the overall repair process involves the rapid
elimination of damaged cells through apoptosis (Zupanc et  al. 1998). The first
apoptotic cells, as identified by the TUNEL technique, occur at the lesion site as
early as 5 min after application of the stab wound (Fig. 5.10). Thirty minutes after
the lesion, the number of cells undergoing apoptosis reaches maximum levels.
At 2 days post lesion, the number of apoptotic cells starts to gradually decline until
background levels are reached approximately 20  days after the lesion. Over this
time period, only a few cells appear to undergo necrotic cell death.

156

G.K.H. Zupanc

Fig. 5.10  Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL)-positive cells
at the site of the lesion in the corpus cerebelli after survival times of 5 min (a), 15 min (b), 30 min
(c), 1 day (d), 5 days (e), and 20 days (f). The location of the lesion is indicated by arrowheads in
the DAPI counterstains (a¢–f¢). The number of TUNEL-positive cells dramatically increases
within the first 30  min, stays at high levels for another day, and then gradually declines to
­background levels. (After Zupanc et al. 1998)

The elimination of injured cells almost exclusively by apoptosis is remarkable
because this contrasts with the type of cell death encountered in mammals. In the latter
taxon, necrotic cell death dominates within the core of the injury. Apoptosis occurs in
a significant number of cells only in surrounding areas (for reviews, see Beattie et al.
2000; Vajda 2002; Liou et al. 2003). Necrosis often leads to inflammation at the site
of the injury (for review, see Kerr et al. 1995). This inflammatory response triggers
further necrotic events, thus gradually transforming the site of injury into large cavities
devoid of cells (Zhang et al. 1997). These cavities are typically bordered by astrocytic
scars that act as mechanical and biochemical barriers preventing the ingrowth of nerve
fibers and the migration of cells into the lesion site (for review, see Reier et al. 1983).

5  Adult Neurogenesis in Fish

157

Fig. 5.10  (continued)

In contrast to necrosis, apoptosis is characterized by cell shrinkage, nuclear
c­ ondensation, and production of membrane-enclosed particles that are digested
by other cells. Most significantly, the side effects that accompany necrosis, such
as inflammation of the surrounding tissue, are typically absent in apoptosis. Thus,
use of this “clean” type of cell death for the elimination of damaged cells appears
to be an essential component of the enormous regenerative capability of the adult
fish brain.

5.4.3 Removal of Damaged Cells
The cellular debris caused by apoptosis is thought to be removed by the action of
microglia/macrophages. Their number is very low in the intact brain but starts to

158

G.K.H. Zupanc

increase at and near the lesion site approximately 3  days after application of the
lesion (Zupanc et al. 2003). A similar increase, although less pronounced, is found
in the contralateral hemisphere. The areal density of microglia/macrophages
reaches maximum levels at approximately 10 days post lesion and returns to background levels approximately 1  month after the lesion. A similar increase in the
number of microglia/macrophages in response to central nervous system (CNS)
lesions, paralleled by active phagocytic activity, has been found in other systems
and species (for reviews, see Kreutzberg 1996; Moore and Thanos 1996; Streit
et al. 1999; Nagamoto-Combs et al. 2007).

5.4.4 Neuroprotection
In light of the massive wave of apoptotic cell death after injury, it is likely that
survival-promoting factors exist that prevent unrestricted cell death after injuries.
Correlative evidence suggests that this might be achieved by calbindin-D28k
­signaling. The expression of this vitamin D-dependent calcium-binding protein is
transiently increased in granular neurons in the lesion path and the immediate vicinity
of the lesion in the period between 16 h and 7 days after the lesion (Zupanc and
Zupanc 2006b). Calbindin-D28k is likely to exert its neuroprotective function by
buffering free intracellular Ca2+, the concentration of which is commonly elevated
after brain insults.

5.4.5 Replacement of Damaged Nerve Cells by Newly
Generated Neurons
Within a few weeks following the lesion, the cells eliminated through apoptosis are
replaced by newly generated ones. Most of these cells are produced 1–10 days after
the injury. During this time period, the rate of cell proliferation is increased several
fold at the site of the lesion, compared to unlesioned sites of the corpus cerebelli
(Zupanc and Ott 1999).
In addition to the cells produced in response to the injury, cells that are born
before the lesion also contribute to the restoration of damaged tissue. BrdU-labeling
experiments have shown that cells generated as early as 2 days before the ­application
of the lesion still participate in the process of regeneration (Zupanc and Ott 1999).
This observation suggests a direct relationship between the continuous cell
­proliferation in the intact brain and neuronal regeneration after injury. The continuous provision of a pool of undifferentiated cells in the intact brain appears to enable
fish to recruit new cells much more rapidly in the event of injuries than would be
possible by recruiting only cells that are generated in response to such events.
As in the intact cerebellum, the cells destined to replace the ones lost to injury
are guided to the lesion site by GFAP-immunopositive radial glial fibers (Clint and

5  Adult Neurogenesis in Fish

159

Zupanc 2001). The density of these fibers starts to increase approximately 8 days
post lesion. The number of a second population of radial glial fibers, characterized
by vimentin immunoreactivity, increases slightly later, about 15  days after the
injury (Clint and Zupanc 2002). The function of the vimentin-expressing radial
glia is unknown.
At least some, but presumably most, of the new cells recruited for tissue repair
develop into granular neurons, the phenotype of most of the neurons that are lost to
the injury. Retrograde tracing experiments combined with labeling of S-phase cells
with BrdU have further shown that these new granule cell neurons send axons into
the associated molecular layer (Zupanc and Ott 1999). This finding suggests that the
new granular neurons integrate into the existing neural network of the cerebellum.

5.4.6 Molecular Identification of Regeneration-Associated
Proteins
What cellular factors mediate the ability of teleost fish to regenerate brain injuries?
Considering just the major repair steps described above, it is obvious that a ­tremendous
number of molecular signals must be overall involved in the process of brain regeneration. A large-scale molecular identification of these signals has become feasible
with the advent of proteomics (for review, see Zupanc 2007; Zupanc and Zupanc
2011). The applicability of this approach to study brain regeneration in fish has been
demonstrated using the regenerating cerebellum of A. leptorhynchus as a model system (Fig.  5.11a) (Zupanc et  al. 2006). This system combines the cerebellar lesion
paradigm, as described above, with differential proteome ­analysis. Examination of
cerebellar tissue collected 3 days after application of lesions (when a marked increase
in the generation of new cells recruited for the replacement of the cells lost to injury
occurs; Zupanc and Ott 1999) has revealed significant alterations in protein spot
intensity on two-dimensional (2D) gels in 53 of nearly 800 protein spots (Fig. 5.11b)
(Zupanc et al. 2006). Twenty-four of these differentially regulated proteins could be
identified by peptide mass fingerprinting and mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry
fragmentation. These proteins can be divided into three groups.
The first group includes cytoskeletal proteins essential for the formation of new
cells, such as b-actin and b-tubulin. The transient upregulation of b-actin expression
appears to relate to the regeneration of injured axons in the area of the lesion and the
development of axons of the newly generated cells, as suggested by immunohistochemical staining of brain sections after application of mechanical lesions to the
corpus cerebelli (Zupanc et al. 2006). Such a proposed function is also in line with
the results of regeneration studies in mammals, which have demonstrated an upregulation of actin within a few days after axotomy, reflecting the emergence of axonal
sprouts and the concomitant needs to lengthen the axon shaft and to support membrane expansion at the growth cone (Tetzlaff et al. 1991; Lund et al. 2002; Lund and
McQuarrie 1996). The transient increase in abundance of b-tubulin is closely
­associated with the appearance of thin capillaries at the site of the lesion several days

160

G.K.H. Zupanc

a
MW
(kDa)
80
60
50

MW
(kDa)

Lesion

Control

40

80
60
50
40

30

30

20

20

4.5

5

5.5

Fold of change (lessioned/intact)

b

6

6.5

pI

4.5

5

5.5

6

6.5

pI

12
8
4
0
−4
−8
−12

0

200
400
600
Protein spot number

800

Fig. 5.11  (a) Images of two-dimensional (2D) gels of proteins from the intact corpus cerebelli
(Control) and lesioned corpus cerebelli (Lesion) at a postlesion survival time of 3  days in
A. leptorhynchus. (b) Scatter plot of the fold changes of 772 polypeptide spots in the corpus
cerebelli of A. leptorhynchus 3 days after a lesion compared to unlesioned controls. Decrease in
protein abundance is indicated by negative changes, increase by positive changes. Proteins are
sorted in ascending order of the spot intensity change. The analysis is based on a comparison of
the averaged spot intensities of four 2D gels from lesioned brains and three 2D gels from intact
brains. Dotted lines indicate the +2-fold and −2-fold threshold. (After Zupanc et al. 2006)

after application of the stab wound, presumably reflecting the generation of new
endothelial cells. Also included in this first group are proteins that mediate the
­correct assembly of these structural proteins. Among the latter are chaperonin containing tailless-complex polypeptide 1, subunit e, which might mediate chaperoning
of cytoskeletal proteins; tropomodulins-3 and -4, which are known to perform capping of slow-growing ends of actin filaments; and bullous pemphigoid antigen 1,
which has been proposed to link actin with intermediate filament proteins.
The second group is composed of proteins potentially involved in cell proliferation (such as keratin-10), cellular motility (such as myosin heavy chain), neuroprotection (such as 78,000-Da glucose-regulated protein, glutamine synthetase, and

5  Adult Neurogenesis in Fish

161

cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase), and energy metabolism (such as a- and
b-enolase, as well as F-ATP synthase b-subunit). Remarkably, the abundance of
glutamine synthetase is increased after cerebellar lesions in fish (Zupanc et  al.
2006), whereas this enzyme is downregulated under traumatic conditions in the
mammalian central nervous system (Grosche et al. 1995; Härtig et al. 1995; Lewis
et al. 1989, 1994; Oliver et al. 1990; Smith et al. 1991). Glutamine synthetase is a
glia-specific enzyme that converts synaptically released glutamate into the nontoxic
amino acid glutamine. Under normal conditions, this mechanism prevents the accumulation of neurotoxic amounts of glutamate in neural tissue and thus protects
neurons from cell death. However, under traumatic conditions the amount of glutamine synthetase is insufficient to catalyze the excessive amounts of glutamate
released by damaged cells. The additional downregulation of glutamine synthetase
after brain trauma in mammals aggravates the situation in mammals, thus failing to
limit the spread of damage caused by continuous overexcitation of postsynaptic
glutamate receptors. On the other hand, the upregulation of glutamine synthetase in
fish is likely to provide an important mechanism to reduce the neurodegenerative
effect induced by glutamate neurotoxicity. Such differences in the expression pattern of proteins between fish and mammals are particularly interesting because they
provide hints about possible cellular correlates for the enormous difference in the
regenerative potential between the two vertebrate taxa.
The third group consists of a single protein, bone marrow zinc finger 2. This
protein was first identified from a screen of zinc finger proteins in the hematopoietic system (Han et al. 1999). Although nothing is known about its role in the nervous system, its molecular structure and some experimental evidence based on
examination of Wilms’ tumor, a pediatric kidney cancer, suggest that bone marrow
zinc finger 2 acts as a transcriptional regulator (Lee et al. 2002). During regeneration of the teleost cerebellum, it may exert a similar function, that is, regulating the
transcription of genes of other proteins.

References
Altman J (1962) Are new neurons formed in the brains of adult mammals? Science 135:1127–1128
Altman J (1969) Autoradiographic and histological studies of postnatal neurogenesis: IV. Cell
proliferation and migration in the anterior forebrain, with special reference to persisting neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb. J Comp Neurol 137:433–458
Altman J, Das GD (1965) Autoradiographic and histological evidence of postnatal hippocampal
neurogenesis in rats. J Comp Neurol 124:319–336
Alvarez-Buylla A, Nottebohm F (1988) Migration of young neurons in adult avian brain. Nature
335:353–354
Anderson MJ, Waxman SG, Laufer M (1983) Fine structure of regenerated ependyma and spinal
cord in Sternarchus albifrons. Anat Rec 205:73–83
Anderson MJ, Waxman SG, Lee Y-L, Eng LF (1987) Molecular differentiation of neurons from
ependyma-derived cells in tissue cultures of regenerating teleost spinal cord. Mol Brain Res
2:131–136
Beattie MS, Farooqui AA, Bresnahan JC (2000) Review of current evidence for apoptosis after
spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma 17:915–925

162

G.K.H. Zupanc

Bédard A, Parent A (2004) Evidence of newly generated neurons in the human olfactory bulb. Dev
Brain Res 151:159–168
Bell C, Bodznick D, Montgomery J, Bastian J (1997) The generation and subtraction of sensory
expectations within cerebellum-like structures. Brain Behav Evol 50 (Suppl. 1):17–31
Braford MR (1995) Comparative aspects of forebrain organization in the ray-finned fishes: touchstones or nor? Brain Behav Evol 46:259–274
Butler AB (2000) Topography and topology of the teleost telencephalon: a paradoxon resolved.
Neurosci Lett 293:95–98
Cameron DA (2000) Cellular proliferation and neurogenesis in the injured retina of adult
zebrafish. Vis Neurosci 17:789–797
Cameron HA, McKay RD (2001) Adult neurogenesis produces a large pool of new granule cells
in the dentate gyrus. J Comp Neurol 435:406–417
Candal E, Anadón R, DeGrip WJ, Rodríguez-Moldes I (2005) Patterns of cell proliferation and
cell death in the developing retina and optic tectum of the brown trout. Dev Brain Res
154:101–119
Carlsen J, De Olmos J, Heimer L (1982) Tracing of two-neuron pathways in the olfactory system
by the aid of transneuronal degeneration: projections to the amygdaloid body and hippocampal
formation. J Comp Neurol 208:196–208
Clint SC, Zupanc GKH (2001) Neuronal regeneration in the cerebellum of adult teleost fish,
Apteronotus leptorhynchus : guidance of migrating young cells by radial glia. Dev Brain Res
130:15–23
Clint SC, Zupanc GKH (2002) Up-regulation of vimentin expression during regeneration in the
adult fish brain. NeuroReport 13:317–320
Corotto FS, Henegar JA, Maruniak JA (1993) Neurogenesis persists in the subependymal layer of
the adult mouse brain. Neurosci Lett 149:111–114
Corwin JT (1981) Postembryonic production and aging of inner ear hair cells in sharks. J Comp
Neurol 201:541–553
Curtis MA, Kam M, Nannmark U, Anderson MF, Axell MZ, Wikkelso C, Holtas S, van RoonMom WMC, Björk-Eriksson T, Nordborg C, Frisén J, Dragunow M, Faull RLM, Eriksson PS
(2007) Human neuroblasts migrate to the olfactory bulb via a lateral ventricular extension.
Science 315:1243–1249
Ekström P, Johnsson C-M, Ohlin L-M (2001) Ventricular proliferation zones in the brain of an
adult teleost fish and their relation to neuromeres and migration (secondary matrix) zones.
J Comp Neurol 436:92–110
Eriksson PS, Perfilieva E, Bjork-Eriksson T, Alborn AM, Nordborg C, Peterson DA, Gage FH
(1998) Neurogenesis in the adult human hippocampus. Nat Med 4:1313–1317
Fine ML (1989) Embryonic, larval and adult development of the sonic neuromuscular system in
the oyster toadfish. Brain Behav Evol 34:13–24
Fontana X, Nacher J, Soriano E, Del Rio JA (2006) Cell proliferation in the adult hippocampal
formation of rodents and its modulation by entorhinal and fimbria-fornix afferents. Cereb
Cortex 16:301–312
Gould E, Reeves AJ, Fallah M, Tanapat P, Gross CG, Fuchs E (1999) Hippocampal neurogenesis
in adult Old World primates. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:5263–5267
Grandel H, Kaslin J, Ganz J, Wenzel I, Brand M (2006) Neural stem cells and neurogenesis in the
adult zebrafish brain: origin, proliferation dynamics, migration and cell fate. Dev Biol 295:
263–277
Graziadei PP, Graziadei GA (1979) Neurogenesis and neuron regeneration in the olfactory system
of mammals. I. Morphological aspects of differentiation and structural organization of the
olfactory sensory neurons. J Neurocytol 8:1–18
Gregory WA, Edmondson JC, Hatten ME, Mason CA (1988) Cytology and neuron-glial apposition of migrating cerebellar granule cells in vitro. J Neurosci 8:1728–1738
Grosche J, Härtig W, Reichenbach A (1995) Expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP),
glutamine synthetase (GS), and Bcl-2 protooncogene protein by Müller (glial) cells in retinal
light damage of rats. Neurosci Lett 185:119–122

5  Adult Neurogenesis in Fish

163

Hagedorn M, Fernald RD (1992) Retinal growth and cell addition during embryogenesis in the
teleost, Haplochromis burtoni. J Comp Neurol 321:193–208
Han Z-G, Zhang Q-H, Ye M, Kan L-X, Gu B-W, He K-L, Shi S-L, Zhou J, Fu G, Mao M, Chen
S-J, Yu L, Chen Z (1999) Molecular cloning of six novel Krüppel-like zinc finger genes from
hematopoietic cells and identification of a novel transregulatory domain KRNB. J Biol Chem
274:35741–35748
Härtig W, Grosche J, Distler C, Grimm D, el-Hifnawi E, Reichenbach A (1995) Alterations of
Müller (glial) cells in dystrophic retinae of RCS rats. J Neurocytol 24:507–517
Herculano-Houzel S, Lent R (2005) Isotropic fractionator: a simple, rapid method for the quantification of total cell and neuron numbers in the brain. J Neurosci 25:2518–2521
Herrup K, Sunter K (1987) Numerical matching during cerebellar development: quantitative
analysis of granule cell death in staggerer mouse chimeras. J Neurosci 7:829–836
Herrup K, Shojaeian-Zanjani H, Panzini L, Sunter K, Mariani J (1996) The numerical matching
of source and target populations in the CNS: the inferior olive to Purkinje cell projection. Dev
Brain Res 96:28–35
Higgs DM, Souza MJ, Wilkins HR, Presson JC, Popper AN (2002) Age- and size-related changes
in the inner ear and hearing ability of the adult zebrafish (Danio rerio). J Assoc Res
Otolaryngol 3:174–184
Hinsch K, Zupanc GKH (2006) Isolation, cultivation, and differentiation of neural stem cells from
adult fish brain. J Neurosci Methods 158:75–88
Hinsch K, Zupanc GKH (2007) Generation and long-term persistence of new neurons in the adult
zebrafish brain: a quantitative analysis. Neuroscience 146:679–696
Hitchcock PF, Lindsey Myhr KJ, Easter SS, Jr., Mangione-Smith R, Jones DD (1992) Local
regeneration in the retina of the goldfish. J Neurobiol 23:187–203
Insausti R, Marcos P, Arroyo-Jimenez MM, Blaizot X, Martinez-Marcos A (2002) Comparative
aspects of the olfactory portion of the entorhinal cortex and its projection to the hippocampus
in rodents, nonhuman primates, and the human brain. Brain Res Bull 57:557–560
Janssen J, Coombs S, Hoekstra D, Platt C (1987) Anatomy and differential growth of the lateral
line system of the mottled sculpin, Cottus bairdi (Scorpaeniformes: Cottidae). Brain Behav
Evol 30:210–229
Johns PR, Easter SSJ (1977) Growth of the adult goldfish eye: II. Increase in retinal cell number.
J Comp Neurol 176:331–342
Johns PR (1982) Formation of photoreceptors in larval and adult goldfish. J Neurosci 2:178–198
Kaplan MS, Bell DH (1984) Mitotic neuroblasts in the 9-day-old and 11-month-old rodent hippocampus. J Neurosci 4:1429–1441
Kaplan MS, McNelly NA, Hinds JW (1985) Population dynamics of adult-formed granule neurons of the rat olfactory bulb. J Comp Neurol 239:117–125
Kaushal D, Contos JJA, Treuner K, Yang AH, Kingsbury MA, Rehen SK, McConnell MJ, Okabe M,
Barlow C, Chun J (2003) Alteration of gene expression by chromosome loss in the postnatal
mouse brain. J Neurosci 23:5599–5606
Kempermann G, Gast D, Kronenberg G, Yamaguchi M, Gage FH (2003) Early determination and
long-term persistence of adult-generated new neurons in the hippocampus of mice.
Development 130:391–399
Kerr JFR, Gobé GC, Winterford CM, Harmon BV (1995) Anatomical methods in cell death. In:
Schwartz LM, Osborne BA (eds) Cell Death, pp 1–27. Academic Press, San Diego
Kirsche W (1967) Über postembryonale Matrixzonen im Gehirn verschiedener Vertebraten und
deren Beziehung zur Hirnbauplanlehre. Z mikrosk-anat Forsch 77:313–406
Kornack DR, Rakic P (1999) Continuation of neurogenesis in the hippocampus of the adult
macaque monkey. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:5768–5773
Koumans JTM, Akster HA (1995) Myogenic cells in development and growth of fish. Comp
Biochem Physiol 110A:3–20
Kranz D, Richter W (1970a) Autoradiographische Untersuchungen über die Lokalisation der
Matrixzonen des Diencephalons von juvenilen und adulten Lebistes reticulatus (Teleostei).
Z Mikrosk-Anat Forsch 82:42–66

164

G.K.H. Zupanc

Kranz D, Richter W (1970b) Autoradiographische Untersuchungen zur DNS-Synthese im
Cerebellum und in der Medulla oblongata von Teleostiern verschiedenen Lebensalters.
Z mikrosk-anat Forsch 82:264–292
Kreutzberg GW (1996) Microglia: a sensor for pathological events in the CNS. Trends Neurosci
19:312–318
Lee TH, Lwu S, Kim J, Pelletier J (2002) Inhibition of Wilms tumor 1 transactivation by bone
marrow zinc finger 2, a novel transcriptional repressor. J Biol Chem 277:44826–44837
Lewis GP, Erickson PA, Guerin CJ, Anderson DH, Fisher SK (1989) Changes in the expression
of specific Müller cell proteins during long-term retinal detachment. Exp Eye Res 49:93–111
Lewis GP, Guerin CJ, Anderson DH, Matsumoto B, Fisher SK (1994) Rapid changes in the
expression of glial cell proteins caused by experimental retinal detachment. Am J Ophthalmol
118:368–376
Liou AKF, Clark RS, Henshall DC, Yin X-M, Chen J (2003) To die or not to die for neurons in
ischemia, traumatic brain injury and epilepsy: a review on the stress-activated signaling pathways and apoptotic pathways. Prog Neurobiol 69:103–142
Lois C, Alvarez-Buylla A (1994) Long-distance neuronal migration in the adult mammalian brain.
Science 264:1145–1148
Lois C, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (1996) Chain migration of neuronal precursors.
Science 271:978–981
Lund LM, McQuarrie IG (1996) Axonal regrowth upregulates b-actin and Jun D mRNA
expression. J Neurobiol 31:476–486
Lund LM, Machado VM, McQuarrie IG (2002) Increased b-actin and tubulin polymerization in
regrowing axons: relationship to the conditioning lesion effect. Exp Neurol 178:306–312
Luskin MB (1993) Restricted proliferation and migration of postnatally generated neurons from
the forebrain subventricular zone. Neuron 11:173–189
Magrassi L, Graziadei PP (1995) Cell death in the olfactory epithelium. Anat Embryol
192:77–87
Mansour-Robaey S, Pinganaud G (1990) Quantitative and morphological study of cell proliferation during morphogenesis in the trout visual system. J Hirnforsch 31:495–504
Marcus RC, Delaney CL, Easter SS (1999) Neurogenesis in the visual system of embryonic and
adult zebrafish (Danio rerio ). Vis Neurosci 16:417–424
Meyer RL (1978) Evidence from thymidine labeling for continuing growth of retina and tectum
in juvenile goldfish. Exp Neurol 59:99–111
Moore S, Thanos S (1996) The concept of microglia in relation to central nervous system disease
and regeneration. Prog Neurobiol 48:441–460
Nagamoto-Combs K, McNeal DW, Morecraft RJ, Combs CK (2007) Prolonged microgliosis in
the rhesus monkey central nervous system after traumatic brain injury. J Neurotrauma
24:1719–1742
Nguyen V, Deschet K, Henrich T, Godet E, Joly JS, Wittbrodt J, Chourrout D, Bourrat F (1999)
Morphogenesis of the optic tectum in the medaka (Oryzias latipes): a morphological and
molecular study, with special emphasis on cell proliferation. J Comp Neurol 413:385–404
Nieuwenhuys R, Meek J (1990) The telencephalon of actinopterygian fishes. In: Jones EG, Peters A
(eds) Comparative structure and evolution of the cerebral cortex, pp 31–73. Plenum, New York
Northcutt RG (1995) The forebrain of gnathostomes: in search of a morphotype. Brain Behav Evol
46:275–318
Northcutt RG, Braford MR (1980) New observations on the organization and evolution of the
telencephalon of actinopterygian fishes. In: Ebbesson SOE (eds) Comparative Neurology of
the Telencephalon, pp 41–98. Plenum, New York
Oliver CN, Starke-Reed PE, Stadtman ER, Liu GJ, Carney JM, Floyd RA (1990) Oxidative damage to brain proteins, loss of glutamine synthetase activity, and production of free radicals
during ischemia/reperfusion-induced injury to gerbil brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
87:5144–5147
Osada T, Kusakabe H, Akutsu H, Yagi T, Yanagimachi R (2002) Adult murine neurons: their
chromatin and chromosome changes and failure to support embryonic development as revealed
by nuclear transfer. Cytogenet Genome Res 97:7–12

5  Adult Neurogenesis in Fish

165

Ott R, Zupanc GKH, Horschke I (1997) Long-term survival of postembryonically born cells in the
cerebellum of gymnotiform fish, Apteronotus leptorhynchus. Neurosci Lett 221:185–188
Otteson DC, Hitchcock PF (2003) Stem cells in the teleost retina: persistent neurogenesis and
injury-induced regeneration. Vision Res 43:927–936
Paulin MG (1993) The role of the cerebellum in motor control and perception. Brain Behav Evol
41:39–50
Pencea V, Bingaman KD, Freedman LJ, Luskin MB (2001) Neurogenesis in the subventricular zone
and rostral migratory stream of the neonatal and adult primate forebrain. Exp Neurol 172:1–16
Portavella M, Torres B, Salas C (2004) Avoidance response in goldfish: emotional and temporal
involvement of medial and lateral telencephalic pallium. J Neurosci 24:2335–2342
Pouwels E (1978a) On the development of the cerebellum of the trout, Salmo gairdneri:
I. Patterns of cell migration. Anat Embryol 152:291–308
Pouwels E (1978b) On the development of the cerebellum of the trout, Salmo gairdneri:
III. Development of neuronal elements. Anat Embryol 153:37–54
Raff MC (1992) Social controls on cell survival and cell death. Nature 356:397–400
Raff MC, Barres BA, Burne JF, Coles HS, Ishizaki Y, Jacobson MD (1993) Programmed cell
death and the control of cell survival: lessons from the nervous system. Science 262:695–700
Rahmann H (1968) Autoradiographische Untersuchungen zum DNS-Stoffwechsel (MitoseHäufigkeit) im ZNS von Brachydanio rerio HAM. BUCH. (Cyprinidae, Pisces). J Hirnforsch
10:279–284
Rajendran RS, Zupanc MM, Lösche A, Westra J, Chun J, Zupanc GKH (2007) Numerical chromosome variation and mitotic segregation defect in the adult brain of teleost fish. Dev
Neurobiol 67:1334–1347
Rajendran RS, Wellbrock UM, Zupanc GKH (2011) Apoptotic cell death, long-term persistence,
and neuronal differentiation of aneuploid cells generated in the adult brain of teleost fish. Dev
Neurobiol 68:1257–1268
Rakic P (1971) Neuron–glia relationship during granule cell migration in developing cerebellar
cortex: a Golgi and electronmicroscopic study in Macacus rhesus. J Comp Neurol 141:
283–312
Rakic P (1972) Mode of cell migration to the superficial layers of fetal monkey neocortex. J Comp
Neurol 145:61–83
Raymond PA, Easter SS, Jr. (1983) Postembryonic growth of the optic tectum in goldfish.
I. Location of germinal cells and numbers of neurons produced. J Neurosci 3:1077–1091
Raymond PA, Easter SS, Jr., Burnham JA, Powers MK (1983) Postembryonic growth of the optic
tectum in goldfish. II. Modulation of cell proliferation by retinal fiber input. J Neurosci 3:
1092–1099
Rehen SK, McConnell MJ, Kaushal D, Kingsbury MA, Yang AH, Chun J (2001) Chromosomal
variation in neurons of the developing and adult mammalian nervous system. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 98:13361–13366
Rehen SK, Yung YC, McCreight MP, Kaushal D, Yang AH, Almeida BSV, Kingsbury MA, Cabral
KMS, McConnell MJ, Anliker B, Fontanoz M, Chun J (2005) Constitutional aneuploidy in the
normal human brain. J Neurosci 25:2176–2180
Reier PJ, Stensaas LJ, Guth L (1983) The astrocytic scar as an impediment to regeneration in the
central nervous system. In: Kao CC, Bunge RP, Reier PJ (eds) Spinal Cord Reconstruction, pp
163–195. Raven Press, New York
Richter W, Kranz D (1970a) Autoradiographische Untersuchungen über die Abhängigkeit des
3
H-Thymidin-Index vom Lebensalter in den Matrixzonen des Telencephalons von Lebistes
reticulatus (Teleostei). Z mikrosk-anat Forsch 81:530–554
Richter W, Kranz D (1970b) Die Abhängigkeit der DNS-Synthese in den Matrixzonen des
Mesencephalons vom Lebensalter der Versuchstiere (Lebistes reticulatus – Teleostei):
Autoradiographische Untersuchungen. Z mikrosk-anat Forsch 82:76–92
Rodríguez F, López JC, Vargas JP, Gómez Y, Broglio C, Salas C (2002) Conservation of spatial memory
function in the pallial forebrain of reptiles and ray-finned fishes. J Neurosci 22:2894–2903
Rowe RWD, Goldspink G (1969) Muscle fibre growth in five different muscles in both sexes of
mice. J Anat 104:519–530

166

G.K.H. Zupanc

Rowlerson A, Veggetti A (2001) Cellular mechanisms of post-embryonic muscle growth in aquaculture species. In: Johnston IA (ed) Muscle Development and Growth, pp 103–140. Academic
Press, San Diego
Sanai N, Tramontin AD, Quinones-Hinojosa A, Barbaro NM, Gupta N, Kunwar S, Lawton MT,
McDermott MW, Parsa AT, García-Verdugo JM, Berger MS, Alvarez-Buylla A (2004) Unique
astrocyte ribbon in adult human brain contains neural stem cells but lacks chain migration.
Nature 427:740–744
Seri B, García-Verdugo JM, McEwen BS, Alvarez-Buylla A (2001) Astrocytes give rise to new
neurons in the adult mammalian hippocampus. J Neurosci 21:7153–7160
Sîrbulescu RF, Zupanc GKH (in press) Spinal cord repair in regeneration-competent vertebrates:
adult teleost fish as a model system. Brain Res Rev
Smith CD, Carney JM, Starke-Reed PE, Oliver CN, Stadtman ER, Floyd RA, Markesbery WR
(1991) Excess brain protein oxidation and enzyme dysfunction in normal aging and in
Alzheimer disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:10540–10543
Soutschek J, Zupanc GKH (1995) Apoptosis as a regulator of cell proliferation in the central
posterior/prepacemaker nucleus of adult gymnotiform fish, Apteronotus leptorhynchus.
Neurosci Lett 202:133–136
Soutschek J, Zupanc GKH (1996) Apoptosis in the cerebellum of adult teleost fish, Apteronotus
leptorhynchus. Dev Brain Res 97:279–286
Streit WJ, Walter SA, Pennell NA (1999) Reactive microgliosis. Prog Neurobiol 57:563–581
Takeda A, Nakano M, Goris RC, Funakoshi K (2008) Adult neurogenesis with 5-HT expression
in lesioned goldfish spinal cord. Neuroscience 151:1132–1141
Tetzlaff W, Alexander SW, Miller FD, Bisby MA (1991) Response of facial and rubrospinal neurons to axotomy: changes in mRNA expression for cytoskeletal proteins and GAP-43.
J Neurosci 11:2528–2544
Vajda FJ (2002) Neuroprotection and neurodegenerative disease. J Clin Neurosci 9:4–8
van Groen T, Kadish I, Wyss JM (2002) Species differences in the projections from the entorhinal
cortex to the hippocampus. Brain Res Bull 57:553–556
van Groen T, Miettinen P, Kadish I (2003) The entorhinal cortex of the mouse: organization of the
projection to the hippocampal formation. Hippocampus 13:133–149
Vargas JP, Rodríguez F, López JC, Arias JL, Salas C (2000) Spatial learning-induced increase in
the argyophilic nucleolar organizer region of dorsolateral telencephalic neurons in goldfish.
Brain Res 865:77–84
Waxman SG, Anderson MJ (1986) Regeneration of central nervous structures: Apteronotus spinal
cord as a model system. In: Bullock TH, Heiligenberg W (eds) Electroreception, pp 183–208.
John Wiley & Sons, New York
Weatherley AH, Gill HS (1985) Dynamics of increase in muscle fibres in fishes in relation to size
and growth. Experientia 41:353–354
Wetts R, Herrup K (1983) Direct correlation between Purkinje and granule cell number in the
cerebella of lurcher chimeras and wild-type mice. Brain Res 312:41–47
Williams RW (2000) Mapping genes that modulate brain development: a quantitative genetic
approach. In: Goffinet AF, Rakic P (eds) Mouse Brain Development, pp 21–49. SpringerVerlag, New York
Winner B, Cooper-Kuhn CM, Aigner R, Winkler J, Kuhn HG (2002) Long-term survival and cell
death of newly generated neurons in the adult rat olfactory bulb. Eur J Neurosci 16:1681–1689
Wullimann MF, Puelles L (1999) Postembryonic neural proliferation in the zebrafish forebrain
and its relationship to prosomeric domains. Anat Embryol (Berl) 199:329–348
Wullimann MF, Rupp B, Reichert H (1996) Neuroanatomy of the Zebrafish Brain: A Topological
Atlas. Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel/Boston/Berlin
Yurov YB, Iourov IY, Monakhov VV, Soloviev IV, Vostrikov VM, Vorsanova SG (2005) The
variation of aneuploidy frequency in the developing and adult human brain revealed by an
interphase FISH study. J Histochem Cytochem 53:385–390
Zakon HH (1984) Postembryonic changes in the peripheral electrosensory system of a weakly
electric fish: addition of receptor organs with age. J Comp Neurol 228:557–570

5  Adult Neurogenesis in Fish

167

Zhang Z, Krebs CJ, Guth L (1997) Experimental analysis of progressive necrosis after spinal cord
trauma in the rat: etiological role of the inflammatory response. Exp Neurol 143:141–152
Zikopoulos B, Kentouri M, Dermon CR (2000) Proliferation zones in the adult brain of a sequential hermaphrodite teleost species (Sparus aurata). Brain Behav Evol 56:310–322
Zimmerman AM, Lowery MS (1999) Hyperplastic development and hypertrophic growth of
muscle fibers in the white seabass (Atractoscion nobilis). J Exp Zool 284:299–308
Zupanc GKH (1999) Neurogenesis, cell death and regeneration in the adult gymnotiform brain.
J Exp Biol 202:1435–1446
Zupanc GKH (2001) Adult neurogenesis and neuronal regeneration in the central nervous system
of teleost fish. Brain Behav Evol 58:250–275
Zupanc GKH (2006a) Neurogenesis and neuronal regeneration in the adult fish brain. J Comp
Physiol A 192:649–670
Zupanc GKH (2006b) Adult neurogenesis and neuronal regeneration in the teleost fish brain: implications
for the evolution of a primitive vertebrate trait. In: Bullock TH, Rubenstein LR (eds) The Evolution
of Nervous Systems in Non-Mammalian Vertebrates, pp 485–520. Academic Press, Oxford
Zupanc GKH (2007) Proteomics of traumatic brain injury and regeneration. Proteomics Clin Appl
1:1362–1372
Zupanc GKH (2008a) Adult neurogenesis in teleost fish. In: Gage FH, Kempermann G, Song H
(eds) Adult Neurogenesis, pp 571–592. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New York
Zupanc GKH (2008b) Adult neurogenesis and neuronal regeneration in the brain of teleost fish.
J Physiol (Paris) 102:357–373
Zupanc GKH (2009) Towards brain repair: insights from teleost fish. Semin Cell Dev Biol
20:683–690
Zupanc GKH, Clint SC (2003) Potential role of radial glia in adult neurogenesis of teleost fish.
Glia 43:77–86
Zupanc GKH, Horschke I (1995) Proliferation zones in the brain of adult gymnotiform fish: a
quantitative mapping study. J Comp Neurol 353:213–233
Zupanc GKH, Ott R (1999) Cell proliferation after lesions in the cerebellum of adult teleost fish:
time course, origin, and type of new cells produced. Exp Neurol 160:78–87
Zupanc GKH, Zupanc MM (1992) Birth and migration of neurons in the central posterior/prepacemaker nucleus during adulthood in weakly electric knifefish (Eigenmannia sp.). Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 89:9539–9543
Zupanc GKH, Zupanc MM (2006a) New neurons for the injured brain: mechanisms of neuronal
regeneration in adult teleost fish. Regenerative Med 1:207–216
Zupanc MM, Zupanc GKH (2006b) Upregulation of calbindin-D28k expression during regeneration in the adult fish cerebellum. Brain Res 1095:26–34
Zupanc GKH, Zupanc MM (2011) Proteomic analysis of CNS injury and recovery. In: Clelland
JD (ed) Genomics, Proteomics, and the Nervous System, pp 511–536. Series: Advances in
Neurobiology, Vol 2. Springer-Verlag, New York
Zupanc MM, Horschke I, Ott R, Rascher GB (1996) Postembryonic development of the cerebellum in gymnotiform fish. J Comp Neurol 370:443–464
Zupanc GKH, Kompass KS, Horschke I, Ott R, Schwarz H (1998) Apoptosis after injuries in the
cerebellum of adult teleost fish. Exp Neurol 152:221–230
Zupanc GKH, Clint SC, Takimoto N, Hughes ATL, Wellbrock UM, Meissner D (2003) Spatiotemporal distribution of microglia/macrophages during regeneration in the cerebellum of
adult teleost fish, Apteronotus leptorhynchus: a quantitative analysis. Brain Behav Evol
62:31–42
Zupanc GKH, Hinsch K, Gage FH (2005) Proliferation, migration, neuronal differentiation, and
long-term survival of new cells in the adult zebrafish brain. J Comp Neurol 488:290–319
Zupanc MM, Wellbrock UM, Zupanc GKH (2006) Proteome analysis identifies novel protein
candidates involved in regeneration of the cerebellum of teleost fish. Proteomics 6:677–696
Zupanc GKH, Wellbrock UM, Sîrbulescu RF, Rajendran RS (2009) Generation, long-term persistence, and neuronal differentiation of cells with nuclear aberrations in the adult zebrafish brain.
Neuroscience 159:1338–1348

Chapter 6

Adult Neurogenesis in Reptiles
Susana González-Granero, Melissa Lezameta, and José Manuel
García-Verdugo

Abstract  Adult neurogenesis in reptiles is a well-documented phenomenon and
exists in many telencephalic areas. The newly generated neurons originate along
the walls of the lateral ventricles, mainly in the sulci. The putative neural progenitors
are radial glial cells. These glial cells give rise to neuroblasts that migrate to their
final destination. In general, the new neurons are born in the portion of the ventricular zone (VZ) adjacent to the telencephalic area where they will be recruited
and migrate radially through the brain parenchyma along the processes of radial
glial cells to their final destination, although migration to the olfactory bulbs (OB)
is different. Specifically, it seems that new neurons of the OB are not produced in
the ventricular walls of the OB ventricle, but instead in more caudal levels of the
lateral ventricles. They then migrate tangentially over the soma of the VZ radial
glia until they reach the OB. Adult neurogenesis creates microneurons and projection neurons, and occasionally there is gliogenesis as well.
One last striking feature of the reptilian brain is their ability to regenerate large
neuronal populations that have died as a result of physical and chemical injuries.
Abbreviations
3AP	
3
HT	
ADVR	
AOB	
AON	

3-Acetylpyridine
Tritiated thymidine
Anterior dorsal ventricular ridge
Accesory olfactory bulb
Anterior olfactory nucleus

S. González-Granero, M. Lezameta, and J.M. García-Verdugo (*)
Unidad de Neurobiología Comparada, Instituto Cavanilles de Biodiversidad y Biología Evolutiva,
Universidad de Valencia, c/ Catedrático José Beltrán nº2, CP 46980 Paterna, Valencia, Spain
e-mail: j.manuel.garcia@uv.es
J.M. García-Verdugo
Laboratorio de Morfología Celular, Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe, Valencia, Spain
and
CIBERNED, Spain
T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_6, © Springer 2011

169

170

BrdU		
CNS		
CRMP-4		
DC		
DMC		
DVR		
GFAP		
LC		
MC		
MOB		
NS		
OB		
PSA-NCAM	
sl		
SP		
ssm		
st		
ST		
sv		
SVZ		
VZ		

S. González-Granero et al.

Bromodeoxyuridine
Central nervous system
Collapsin response-mediated protein 4
Dorsal cortex
Dorsomedial cortex
Dorsal ventricular ridge
Glial fibrillary acidic protein
Lateral cortex
Medial cortex
Main olfactory bulb
Nucleus sphericus
Olfactory bulb
Polysialic neural cell adhesion molecule
Sulcus lateralis
Septum
Sulcus septomedialis
Sulcus terminalis
Striatum
Sulcus ventralis
Subventricular zone
Ventricular zone

6.1 Introduction
Reptiles possess a great capacity to generate neurons during adulthood, both in
normal conditions and following an injury (Lopez-Garcia et al. 1988a; Duffy et al.
1992; Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996; Font et al. 1997; Perez-Cañellas
et  al. 1997). The main studies regarding neurogenesis in reptiles have been conducted in various species of lizards (Lopez-Garcia et al. 1988a; Perez-Cañellas and
Garcia-Verdugo 1996; Marchioro et  al. 2005), but a few can be found in turtles
(Perez-Cañellas et al. 1997) and snakes (Holtzman and Halpern 1991).
Adult neurogenesis takes place mainly in the telencephalon. Nevertheless, neurogenesis has also been described in the cerebellum during early postnatal stages,
but disappears in the adult (Lopez-Garcia et al. 1990b). Reactive neurogenesis has
been studied in the injured spinal cord of lizards, but the data collected support an
axon regeneration phenomenon over a truly neurogenic activity (Duffy et al. 1992).
Adult neurogenesis has been reported in all the main telencephalic subdivisions:
main olfactory bulb and accessory olfactory bulb (MOB and AOB), anterior olfactory
nucleus (AON), cerebral cortex (medial, dorsomedial, dorsal and lateral) (MC,
DMC, DC, and LC, respectively), dorsal ventricular ridge (DVR), septum (SP),
striatum (ST), and nucleus sphericus (NS) (Fig. 6.1). There are striking differences
in the intensity of neurogenesis among the different telencephalic areas, and differences between species have also been reported (Font et al. 2001). The newly generated

6  Adult Neurogenesis in Reptiles

171

Fig.  6.1  Scheme of different telencephalic levels of the reptilian brain showing reptile brain
(a), MOB (b), AOB (c), rostral forebrain (d), precomissural level (e), and postcomissural level
(f). ADVR anterior dorsal ventricular ridge, AOB accessory olfactory bulb, AON anterior olfactory
nucleus, DC dorsal cortex, DMC dorsomedial cortex, LC lateral cortex, MC medial cortex, MOB
main olfactory bulb, NS nucleus sphericus, SP septum, ST striatum

neurons develop on the walls of the lateral ventricles and migrate radially or
tangentially to their target destination.
An interesting aspect of neurogenesis in reptiles is the regenerative potential
following an injury. Following chemical or physical injuries, reactive neurogenesis
is activated, and large numbers of neuroblasts migrate from the proliferative zones
to the injured area to replace the same neuronal types and connections present
before the lesion (Font et al. 1991).
Regardless of the large neurogenic potential observed in reptiles, it remains a
field of study largely unknown. Most research is conducted in mammals, mainly in
rats and mice. Furthermore, little effort has been done to establish a comparative
view regarding the data obtained in the different vertebrate groups.

6.2 Proliferative Areas
During adulthood and in normal conditions, neurogenesis in reptiles is restricted
to the walls of the lateral ventricles, in the region known as ventricular zone (VZ),
as demonstrated by numerous experiments using proliferative markers, such
as bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) or tritiated thymidine (3HT) (Font et  al. 2001).

172

S. González-Granero et al.

Fig. 6.2  Diagram of the cellular composition in the sulci and intersulci regions in the reptilian
brain. (a) Transversal section of a precomissural telencephalic level with the main telencephalic
areas represented in the left hemisphere and the different sulci shown in the right hemisphere.
(b) The sulci regions are characterized by a pseudostratified epithelium with columnar cells,
mostly composed of B cells (blue) and A cells (red). (c) Intersulci areas, generally a monostratified epithelium that holds mainly flattened radial cells: B cells (blue) and E cells (gray). ADVR
anterior dorsal ventricular ridge, DC dorsal cortex, DMC dorsomedial cortex, LC lateral cortex,
MC medial cortex, sl sulcus laterals, SP septum, ssm sulcus septomedialis, ST striatum, st sulcus
terminalis, sv sulcus ventralis

Cells with proliferative potential are found mainly in areas of the VZ known as
“sulci” (Kirsche 1983). Sulci are always located in highly folded areas of the ventricular wall and are the remains of the embryonic germinative tissue that generated
the telencephalon and which retains its proliferative capacity in the adult (Tineo
et al. 1987). Four sulci have been described in reptiles: sulcus septomedialis (ssm),
sulcus lateralis (sl), sulcus ventralis (sv), and sulcus terminalis (st) (Fig. 6.2a).
Sulci are present in all reptiles studied to date, but variations in their proliferative
capacity have been reported between different species and also between different
sulci within the same species. As an example, neurogenic rates in the lizard
Tarentola mauritanica are much higher in the sulcus septomedialis than in the sulcus
lateralis (Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996). In contrast, in the turtle
Trachemys scripta, neurogenesis in the sulcus septomedialis is scarce; most proliferative cells are found in sulci ventralis/terminalis (Perez-Cañellas et al. 1997).
A comparison with other vertebrates reveals basic, possibly ancestral, commonalities in the location of proliferative cells. In birds, proliferative cells are located
also in specialized portions of the VZ of the lateral ventricles (Alvarez-Buylla 1990)
that are referred to as “hot spots.” These are found especially in the dorsal and ventral

6  Adult Neurogenesis in Reptiles

173

region of the lateral portion in the ventricular wall (Alvarez-Buylla et al. 1990), near
areas of VZ that are also folded. Despite these similarities, no attempt has been
made to homologize the proliferative telencephalic areas of birds to the sulci of
reptiles and non-amniotic vertebrates. In mammals, adult neurogenesis takes place
mainly on the walls of the lateral ventricles, in an area known as the subventricular
zone (SVZ) (Doetsch et al. 1999), but in contrast to the situation in reptiles, adult
neurogenesis is also found outside the ventricular walls, in the subgranular zone of
the hippocampus (Seri et al. 2001). There are no reports of adult neurogenesis in
reptiles outside the VZ, except for occasional mitoses in the endothelium and in
parenchyma glial cells (Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996).

6.3 Cellular Composition of the VZ
The walls of the lateral ventricles are lined by radial glial cells (Stensaas and
Stensaas 1968; Garcia-Verdugo et  al. 1981), which characteristically have a flattened or cubical soma and a long radial process that often splits into two or more
branches. In transverse sections, the radial fiber crosses the entire parenchyma until
reaching the pial surface or the surface of blood vessels. Depending on their final
destination, the end feet of radial glial cells give rise to the glial-limiting membrane
or the hematoencephalic barrier. The cell bodies of radial glial cells are bound to
other neighboring glial cells by interdigitations and junctions. Dense junctions joining
the fibers of different glial cells are often found in the neuropil. These cells are
positive for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and glutamine sintetase (MonzonMayor et al. 1990).
There is conspicuous regional variation in the organization of the walls of the
lateral ventricles, with some areas structured as pseudostratified epithelium holding
columnar cells, and other areas organized as a monolayered epithelium of cubic or
flattened cells (Yanes-Mendez et  al. 1988) (see Fig.  6.2). Proliferative sulci are
always found in pseudostratified VZ areas. Most mitoses take place in the sulci, but
some can also be observed in areas between sulci.
Of the four sulci that have been described in reptiles, the sulcus septomedialis
has been most intensively studied. Three-dimensional reconstructions in the
European lizard Podarcis hispanica with electron microscopy reveal two separate
radial glia populations, known as B and E cells (Garcia-Verdugo et  al. 2002)
(Fig.  6.2). The ultrastructure of these cells is very similar, both possessing long
radial expansions that have abundant intermediate filaments, few microtubules,
numerous vacuoles, and elongated mitochondria which usually appear in groups of
two or three in their apical portion. The nucleus is located in the apical region, has
small chromatin clumps, and its membrane is highly invaginated. The cytoplasm
has long dictyosomes, numerous cisternae of rough endoplasmic reticulum, abundant polyribosomes distributed exclusively throughout the cellular soma (absent in
the radial expansions), and small packed groups of intermediate filaments, mainly
at the base of the radial expansion. The main difference between these cell types is

174

S. González-Granero et al.

the presence in type B cells of a cilium with a 9 + 2 structure and a centriole oriented
perpendicularly to the basal corpuscle of the cilium, whereas type E cells have
15–20 cilia with a 9 + 2 structure, without a perpendicular centriole.
Besides these two cells types in contact with the ventricular lumen, a third cell
type has been described in the VZ: type A cells, which are not in contact with the
ventricular surface (Garcia-Verdugo et al. 2002) (Fig. 6.2). Type A cells are migratory cells, their ultrastructure being similar to that of typical migrating cells found
in the neuropil (Garcia-Verdugo et  al. 1986a). These cells have an elongated
nucleus with a large central nucleolus and lax chromatin, few cytoplasmic organelles,
numerous polyribosomes and microtubules, and an internal cilium. Occasionally,
fully formed neurons, microglia, and oligodendrocytes are also found near the VZ.
A comparison with the organization of the VZ in other vertebrates, such as birds
and mammals, reveals both similarities and differences. Three cell types have also
been described in the VZ of birds (Alvarez-Buylla et al. 1998), but there are more differences between the type B and E cells of birds than between the corresponding cell
types in reptiles. Besides the presence of one or multiple cilia, there are ultrastructural
differences including cell size, thickness of the radial expansion, and the chromatin
packing. Mammals have type B, E, and A cells, plus a fourth cell type, called type C
(Doetsch et al. 1997), considered as an intermediate cellular type between B and A
cells. Type C cells are also referred to as amplifying cells because of their high rates
of division. Differences between mammals and reptiles are more pronounced than
between birds and reptiles because in mammals B and E cells are not typical radial
glial cells. Some basic characteristics are retained, nevertheless, such as the primary
cilium and intermediate filaments in B cells, the multiple cilia in E cells, and the
numerous ribosomes and microtubules in A cells (Garcia-Verdugo et al. 2002).

6.4 Neural Progenitor Identity
Proliferation markers such as BrdU or 3HT administered to animals killed after short
survival times consistently show labeled cells in contact with the ventricular lumen.
Moreover, all mitoses found in the VZ are in contact with the ventricular surface and
correspond to cells with the ultrastructure of radial glial cells (Font et al. 2001).
There are no precise data considering the nature of the progenitor cell, but considering the different cell types in contact with the lumen already described, it
seems likely that radial glial cells are the primary neural precursor for adult neurogenesis in reptiles (Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996; Font et  al. 2001).
Further research is required to establish whether both B and E cells play this role
or only one type of these.
In other vertebrate groups, such as birds and mammals, B cells act as neural
progenitors (Alvarez-Buylla et al. 1998; Doetsch et al. 1999). In both mammals and
birds these cells have a glial phenotype, are GFAP+, and have a single cilium as a
special characteristic. Considering this evidence, it seems likely that in reptiles the
neural progenitor function is also accomplished by B cells.

6  Adult Neurogenesis in Reptiles

175

6.5 Migration
Newly generated neurons in reptiles are born in the walls of the lateral ventricles
and migrate to their final location in the nervous parenchyma, where they differentiate
and integrate in existing telencephalic circuits (Lopez-Garcia et al. 1990b).
Although the data are scant, there are differences in the time required for neuroblasts to complete this process. In the tropical lizard Tropidurus hispidus it takes
1–2 weeks for newly generated neuroblasts to start migrating, and they do not reach the
granular layer of the MC until 15–30 days later (Marchioro et al. 2005). In Podarcis
hispanica, it takes only 2–4  days for migration to start, and in a week labeled
cells can already be seen in the cell layer of the MC (Lopez-Garcia et al. 1988a).
Authors of these studies explain the differences based on the presence of GFAP
filaments. Radial glial cells in Tropidurus hispidus are GFAP−, whereas in Podarcis
hispanica they are GFAP+ (Lopez-Garcia et  al. 1992; Marchioro et  al. 2005).
Reduced GFAP immunoreactivity is also observed in other lizards living in warm
habitats (Ahboucha et  al. 2003). However, it is not entirely clear whether this
difference in GFAP expression could be responsible for the differences in the timeframe of adult neurogenesis in these two species.
With few exceptions, newly generated neuroblasts follow a radial migration.
Cells migrate short distances (500 mm maximum), as their final destiny is usually
near the VZ where they are born, along the radial glia expansions (Garcia-Verdugo
et  al. 1986a; Lopez-Garcia et  al. 1988a) and occasionally along blood vessels.
Migrating neuroblasts are fusiform, their orientation is perpendicular to the ventricular surface, and they express neuronal migration markers such as collapsin
response-mediated protein 4 (CRMP-4) and polysialic neural cell adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM) (Nacher et al. 2002; Ramirez-Castillejo et al. 2002). This type
of migration is characteristic of central nervous system (CNS) embryonic development in vertebrates.
There is one exception to the migration pattern just described, and that concerns
migration of newly generated neurons destined for the olfactory bulb (OB).
According to studies conducted in different species, most newly generated neurons,
if not all, that reach the OB are not formed in situ (despite the presence of the VZ
in the OB). Following administration of proliferation markers, no labeled cells are
found in the OB ventricle walls after short survival periods. However, after long
survival times a large number of labeled neurons are seen in the OB (Peñafiel et al.
1996; Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996; Perez-Cañellas et al. 1997). Thus,
it seems likely that new neurons in the bulb originate in the telencephalic VZ caudal
to the OB and would then migrate tangentially over long distances until reaching
their final destination in the OB.
In the lizard Psammodromus algirus, OB neurons are generated in the rostralmost telencephalic area: the AON (Peñafiel et al. 1996). In this species, groups of
fusiform cells were described along the olfactory peduncles. Such cells show a typical
morphology of migrating cells and have a parallel orientation to the ventricular
surface. Migration in this case takes place tangentially and along very restricted

176

S. González-Granero et al.

pathways close to the VZ (Peñafiel et al. 1996; Font et al. 2001). Similar results
have been obtained with the turtle Trachemys scripta, in which the new cells in the
OB originate in the AON and migrate tangentially until they reach the OB (PerezCañellas et al. 1997). The origin of OB neurons could be slightly more caudal in
the gecko Tarentola mauritanica, in which the VZ of the sulci ventralis/terminalis
could give rise to neurons destined for the OB. These sulci show an intense proliferating activity that contrasts with the scarce neurons that can be found after long
survival times in the surrounding nervous parenchyma (Perez-Cañellas and GarciaVerdugo 1996). Regardless of the exact origin of the neurons that will be recruited
into the OB, it seems the migration is always tangential along the VZ until the cells
reach the OB, close to their final target. At that point they can migrate radially,
guided by radial glia fibers until they reach their final destination in the granular
layer of the MOB or AOB (Peñafiel et al. 1996).
Both types of migration – tangential and radial – are common during early
embryonic brain development (Rakic 1971; Austin and Cepko 1990; O’Rourke et al.
1995) and adulthood (Lois and Alvarez-Buylla 1994) in other vertebrate groups.
As an example, in mammals, neuroblasts for the OB originate in the SVZ, migrate
tangentially along the rostral migratory stream, and then they enter the OB where
they migrate radially toward their target layer (Lois and Alvarez-Buylla 1994).
Neurons generated in the dentate gyrus, on the other hand, migrate radially along
radial glia fibers to their final location in the granular layer (Seri et al. 2001).

6.6 Cell Types Generated
A particularly nagging problem in the study of adult neurogenesis in vertebrates is
that of the identity, whether glial or neuronal, of the newly produced cells. Cellular
proliferation in the telencephalic VZ could give rise to glial cells or neurons or
both. Interspecific differences in the proportion of neurons versus glia have been
described, although there are always more neurons than glia generated. The most
complete studies have been conduced in the lizards Podarcis hispanica and
Tarentola mauritanica and in the turtle Trachemys scripta.
Neurogenesis in lizards produces mostly neurons rather than glia (Lopez-Garcia
et  al. 1988a; Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996). This conclusion is supported by reports indicating that, in the intact lizard brain, free glial cells are very
scarce in the telencephalon (Garcia-Verdugo et al. 1981; Font et al. 1995a). In the
adult lizard telencephalon, radial glial cells that cover the surface of the ventricles
are the predominant astroglial element and provide the functions of astrocytic glia
(Garcia-Verdugo et al. 1981).
Proliferation in turtles differs from that in lizards, because in the first both neurogenesis and gliogenesis take place in their adult brain (Perez-Cañellas et  al.
1997). Astrocytes and oligodendrocytes labeled with proliferation markers were
detected in the turtle brain. However, the data obtained are inconclusive as to
whether the newly produced glial cells were generated in situ or whether they were

6  Adult Neurogenesis in Reptiles

177

Fig.  6.3  Electron micrographs of 3H-thymidine-labeled neurons in the telencephalon of lizard.
The upper-left insets show details of the radiolabeled neurons in the autoradiograms from which
the ultrathin sections were prepared and examined (asterisk). (a) Radiolabeled neuron in the olfactory bulbs, a microneuron. (b) Radiolabeled neuron in the cell layer of the medial cortex, a projection neuron. Bars 5 mm

born in the proliferative VZ. Studies in Trachemys scripta elegans suggest that in
the VZ situated across the striatum it is mainly glial cells that arise, whereas neurons
are produced also in all the other VZ (Perez-Cañellas et al. 1997).
Adult neurogenesis in reptiles produces microneurons (e.g., OB) and projection
neurons (e.g., MC) (Peñafiel et al. 1996) (Fig. 6.3). This is a very important difference between reptiles and mammals, in which there is precise documentation only
on the generation of microneurons (Kempermann 2006).
A more detailed analysis shows that the cell types originated by adult neurogenesis in the different species of reptiles have different characteristics depending on
their final location in the telencephalon. In the OB, organized in a similar way to that
described for mammals (Garcia-Verdugo et al. 1986b) (see Fig. 6.1b), newly generated neurons are found mainly in the granular layer and have a rather homogeneous
distribution (Garcia-Verdugo et  al. 1989; Peñafiel et al. 1996; Perez-Cañellas and
Garcia-Verdugo 1996). Occasionally a few cells can be found in the mitral and periglomerular layers, but this occurs in perinatal animals alone (Garcia-Verdugo et al.
1989). The new neurons are similar to those surrounding them and can be characterized by their small spherical nucleus, the lightly packed chromatin, and a prominent
nucleolus, as well as the scarce cytoplasm holding numerous ribosomes (PerezCañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996; Perez-Cañellas et al. 1997) (see Fig. 6.3a).
Adult neurogenesis also occurs in the cortex. Three areas can be distinguished
within the cortex in reptiles: the medial, dorsal and the lateral cortices (see
Fig. 6.1e). In squamate reptiles, an additional zone called the dorsomedial cortex is
has been described. All cortical areas are organized following the same simple
three-layered structure: a granular or cellular layer situated in the center, in which

178

S. González-Granero et al.

most of the neurons are located, and two plexiform layers surrounding the granular
layer. The central layer is thus limited dorsally by the external plexiform layer and
the meningeal layers and ventrally by the internal plexiform layer and the ependyma
that surrounds the ventricle (Ulinski 1990). In a general view, neurogenesis has
been observed in all four regions.
There is evidence supporting the homology between MC and the dentate gyrus
in the hippocampus in mammals (Butler and Hodos 1996). Both have a series of
elements in common: a similar organization and neural population (Luis de la
Iglesia and Lopez-Garcia 1997a,b), a postnatal development of the axonal projection containing zinc that has been compared to the hippocampal mossy fiber system
in charge of the Timm positive system (Lopez-Garcia and Martinez-Guijarro 1988;
Lopez-Garcia et al. 1990a), and the presence of adult neurogenesis (Lopez-Garcia
et al. 1988a). Following long survival times, most newly formed neurons in the MC
are located in the cellular layer and only a few are found in the inner plexiform
layer (Lopez-Garcia et al. 1988a; Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996). Two
neuronal types can be distinguished in the cellular layer of the MC, referred to as
type I and II neurons. Type I are small cells, with packed chromatin and scarce
cytoplasm, whereas type II are large cells with a large oval nucleus, lax chromatin,
a prominent nucleus, and much cytoplasm, which is rich in organelles (especially
Nissl bodies), numerous polyribosomes, and microtubules (Garcia-Verdugo et al.
1984; Davila et al. 1985). Both cell types project to the contralateral hemisphere
and are glutamatergic (Lopez-Garcia et al. 1990a; Martinez-Guijarro et al. 1991).
There are some interesting observations related to the origin of these two cell types.
When newly generated cells are analyzed in this region following treatment with
3
HT and intermediate survival terms (1–3 months), most labeled cells correspond
to type II neurons (Lopez-Garcia et al. 1988a; Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo
1996; Perez-Cañellas et  al. 1997) (see Fig.  6.3b). Perinatal animals have mostly
type II cells, and these cells are also the only ones that seem to be generated in the
adult. It would be expected, as a result, that type II cells should be the predominant
neuronal type in the adult brain. Instead, type I cells are more abundant in the adult
(Lopez-Garcia et al. 1984), suggesting that type II cells transform into type I cells
as a result of specialization associated with a chromatin packing process and a loss
in size and number of organelles. To confirm this hypothesis, the fate of labeled
neurons should be examined after long survival periods. Labeled cells are also
found in the inner plexiform layer. These cells have a fusiform nucleus with a perpendicular orientation regarding the ventricular surface; their ultrastructure is similar
to that described for migrating cells in other lizards (Garcia-Verdugo et al. 1986a),
and they are CRMP-4+ and PSA-NCAM+ (Nacher et al. 2002; Ramirez-Castillejo
et al. 2002). It is thus possible that they are newly produced cells migrating to the
granular layer. Occasionally they have spherical nuclei and are situated on an intermediate level (Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996).
The DMC region is considered to be homologous to the CA3 in the mammalian
hippocampus (Butler and Hodos 1996). Both regions have a contralateral commissural projection and are the main areas receiving input from the zinc-rich mossy
fibers of the MC (Martinez-Garcia et al. 1990). A few newly generated neurons have

6  Adult Neurogenesis in Reptiles

179

only been described in the inner plexiform layer of the DMC of Podarcis hispanica
(Font et  al. 1997). In some species, such as Tarentola mauritanica, there is no
neurogenesis in this cortical region (Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996), or
this telencephalic division may be entirely lacking, as in the turtle Trachemys scripta
(Perez-Cañellas et al. 1997).
Homologies regarding the DC have been a subject of debate. Certain classic
authors argued that it represents the neocortex primordium because it is a polisensorial projection area (Johnston 1916), whereas nowadays homology has been
established with the CA1 and the hippocampal subiculum (Martinez-Garcia et al.
1990). There is no neurogenesis in the granular layer of the DC, but new neurons
are visible instead in the inner plexiform layer, as a part of neuron clusters as well
as isolated (Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996). Such cells are small with an
irregular nucleus, usually invaginated, packed chromatin, and scarce cytoplasm
containing numerous polyribosomes (Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996).
The LC is homologous to the olfactory cortex in mammals (piriform and entorhinal cortex) (Butler and Hodos 1996). Both regions receive input from the MOB
projections and send projections to the MC/dentate gyrus (Martinez-Garcia et al.
1986; Hoogland and Vermeulen-Vanderzee 1995). Newly generated cells appear in
the granular layer and occasionally in the inner plexiform layer of the LC (PerezCañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996). Those in the granular layer are medium in size
with a small spherical nucleus whereas those in the inner plexiform layer have
fusiform nuclei and are probably migrating cells. Their ultrastructure is similar to
that of migrating cells in the MC (Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996), and
they are immunoreactive for PSA-NCAM and CRMP-4 (Nacher et  al. 2002;
Ramirez-Castillejo et al. 2002).
The DVR receives polisensorial inputs and is the main data processing center in
reptiles. It is considered homologous to the pallial amygdala and claustropiriform
components in mammals (Bruce and Neary 1995; Striedter 1997). Newly generated
cells in the DVR are localized in the dorsal region alone, near the VZ, either in
characteristic clusters in the region or isolated (Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo
1996). They have a large spherical nucleus, lax chromatin, and a prominent nucleolus; the cytoplasm contains numerous organelles, a large rough endoplasmic reticulum,
small mitochondria, and numerous dictyosomes and polyribosomes (Perez-Cañellas
and Garcia-Verdugo 1996; Perez-Cañellas et al. 1997).
Newly generated cells in the striatum do not seem to be restricted to certain
areas; instead, they are spread widely and homogeneously (Perez-Cañellas and
Garcia-Verdugo 1996). They show a small round nucleus, slightly packed chromatin, and a prominent nucleolus. Cytoplasm is scarce but rich in organelles, with
small dark mitochondria, a large Golgi system, an extensive rough endoplasmic
reticulum, numerous polyribosomes, and dense secretion granules (Perez-Cañellas
et al. 1997).
The septum (SP) is another telencephalic region in which adult neurogenesis has
not been observed in all species studied. This is the case in the lizard Tarentola
mauritanica, which lacks adult neurogenesis in this region, whereas in Trachemys
scripta new neurons are originated with a very similar appearance to that described

180

S. González-Granero et al.

for the striatum, except for the absence of secretion granules and a smaller rough
endoplasmic reticulum (Perez-Cañellas et al. 1997).
The nucleus sphericus (NS) is a characteristic region in most reptiles; it includes
the most posterior area of the dorsal ventricular ridge (DVR) and is considered to
be homologous to the amygdaline complex in mammals (Ulinski and Kanarek
1973; Butler and Hodos 1996; Martinez-Garcia et al. 2002). It is composed of four
concentric layers, which from the outermost inward are referred to as ependymal,
marginal, mural, and hilus, respectively (see Fig. 6.1f). Newly formed neurons are
localized mainly in external mural layer, near the VZ, often in pairs (Perez-Sanchez
et al. 1989; Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996). They have a small nucleus
and a similar ultrastructure to those in the DC (Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo
1996). In Trachemys scripta this telencephalic subdivision is absent also (PerezCañellas et al. 1997).

6.7 Interspecific Differences in Adult Neurogenesis
Neurogenesis has been described in several species of reptiles in separate regions,
although always in telencephalic areas (Table  6.1). The entire telencephalon has
been analyzed for neurogenic activity in only two species of lizards, Podarcis
hispanica and Tarentola mauritanica, and one species of turtles, Trachemys scripta
(Lopez-Garcia et  al. 1988a; Garcia-Verdugo et  al. 1989; Perez-Sanchez et  al.
1989; Lopez-Garcia et al. 1990b; Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996; Font
et  al. 1997; Perez-Cañellas et  al. 1997). Studies involving other species have
evaluated more precise regions, studying one or more telencephalic areas (GarciaVerdugo et al. 1986a; Duffy et al. 1992; Peñafiel et al. 1996). There is also evidence
for neurogenesis in newborn natricine snakes, after which the authors suggest that
some postnatal neurogenesis may occur in the accessory and main olfactory bulbs
and in the NS (Holtzman and Halpern 1991; Holtzman 1993).
There are studies supporting adult neurogenesis in the main divisions of the lacertid telencephalon, including the main olfactory bulb (MOB), accessory olfactory
bulb (AOB), anterior olfactory nucleus (AON), the four cortical areas, septum (SP),
dorsal ventricular ridge (DVR), striatum, and nucleus sphericus (NS) (Lopez-Garcia
et al. 1988a,b, 1990b; Garcia-Verdugo et al. 1989; Perez-Sanchez et al. 1989; Font
et al. 1997). Specifically, it has been observed for Podarcis hispanica that neurogenesis is more intense in the NS, although still occurring in the MOB, AOB, and MC.
Neurogenic rates in the DMC and SP are considerably low (Font et al. 1997).
Within the family Gekonidae there are only data available for the species Tarentola
mauritanica (Perez-Cañellas and Garcia-Verdugo 1996). Adult neurogenesis occurs
in all the separate telencephalic regions except in one of the cortical regions, the
DMC, and in the SP. The highest neurogenesis rates in Tarentola occur in the MC and
the OB, whereas the lowest involve the lateral cortex (LC) and the striatum.

6  Adult Neurogenesis in Reptiles

181

Table 6.1  Reptile species in which adult neurogenesis has been studied
Species
Region
Technique
Reference
MC, spinal cord 3HT
Duffy et al. (1990)
Anolis carolinensis
3
Emys orbicularis
Telencephalon
HT
Goffinet et al. (1986)
Lacerta trilineata
Gallotia galloti
MC
EM
Garcia-Verdugo
et al. (1986a)
Gallotia galloti
Telencephalon
BrdU
Delgado-Gonzalez
et al. (2008)
3
Lacerta viridis
DC
HT
Minelli et al. (1977)
3
Lampropholis
Spinal cord
HT, EM
Alibardi (1994)
3
Podarcis hispanica
OB
HT
Garcia-Verdugo
et al. (1989)
3
Podarcis hispanica
MC
HT, EM
Lopez-Garcia
et al. (1988a),
Font et al. (1991),
Molowny
et al. (1995)
Podarcis hispanica
MC
Timm+, EM, 3HT,
Lopez-Garcia et al.
GFAP
(1988b), LopezGarcia et al. (1992),
Lopez-Garcia (1993)
Podarcis hispanica
MC
HRP, 3HT, EM
Lopez-Garcia
et al. (1990a)
3
Podarcis hispanica
MC
HT, PCNA
Ramirez et al. (1997)
3
Podarcis hispanica
NS
HT
Perez-Sanchez
et al. (1989)
3
Podarcis hispanica
Telencephalon
HT, EM, HRP
Lopez-Garcia
et al. (1990a,b)
3
Font et al. (1995b),
Podarcis hispanica
Telencephalon
HT, silver
Font et al. (1997)
impregnation
Golgi staining, EM
Podarcis hispanica
Telencephalon
BrdU, CRMP-4
Nacher et al. (2002)
Podarcis hispanica
Telencephalon
PSA-NCAM, BrdU
Ramirez-Castillejo
et al. (2002)
3
Psammodromus algirus OB
HT
Peñafiel et al. (1996)
Tarentola mauritanica
Telencephalon
BrdU, 3HT, EM
Perez-Cañellas and
Garcia-Verdugo
(1996)
3
Trachemys scripta
Telencephalon
HT, EM, BrdU
Perez-Cañellas
et al. (1997)
3
Triturus cristatus
Optic tectum
HT, AChE
Minelli et al. (1987)
MC
BrdU
Marchioro et al. (2005)
Tropidurus hispidus
Brain areas of different species of reptiles in which adult neurogenesis has been studied. The
techniques used are detailed in each case. AChE acetylcholinesterase, BrdU bromodeoxyuridine,
DC dorsal cortex, EM electron microscopy, GFAP glial fibrillary acid protein, HRP horseradish
peroxidase, MC medial cortex, OB olfactory bulb, PCNA proliferating cell nuclear antigen, PSANCAM polysialic acid-neural cell adhesion molecule, 3HT tritiated thymidine

182

S. González-Granero et al.

Adult neurogenesis can also be found in turtles in all telencephalic regions,
although it has to be taken into account that they lack the DMC and NS (PerezCañellas et al. 1997). Adult neurogenesis in Trachemys scripta is more intense in
the OB and barely exists in the MC and SP (Perez-Cañellas et al. 1997). Except for
the OB, it seems that in turtles, in contrast to lizards, postnatal neurogenesis in the
telencephalon is a reminiscent process because only small numbers of neuroblasts
integrate into the neuronal telencephalic populations (Font et al. 2001). Neurogenesis
has also been described outside the telencephalon, in the cerebellum of Podarcis
hispanica, although it must be considered that the animals analyzed were perinatal
(Lopez-Garcia et al. 1990b). Labeled cells have also been seen in the cerebellum of
Trachemys scripta (Perez-Cañellas et al. 1997) that are morphologically similar to
neighboring granular cells, suggesting such cells are neurons instead of glia.
However, an ultrastructural analysis is needed to confirm the presence of adult
neurogenesis in the cerebellum in both species.
Routine light and electron microscopic techniques, as well as degenerationsensitive silver impregnation procedures, have failed to detect neuronal death in the
telencephalon of adult lizards and turtles (Lopez-Garcia et  al. 1990a; Font et  al.
1995b, 1997). This suggests that the neurons born in the brain of adult reptiles
represent a net addition to already existing populations, rather than a replacement
for older neurons. Furthermore, neurons labeled with 3HT or BrdU survive for long
periods of time in their target areas (Perez-Cañellas et al. 1997; Font et al. 2001).
From this finding we conclude that the permanent addition of new neurons, together
with their long-term survival, forms the basis for the continuous growth of most
telencephalic areas in adult reptiles.

6.8 Regenerative Potential in the Central Nervous System
It is well established that reptiles have a significant regenerative ability in their
CNS. Several studies in different species of lizards support such regeneration in the
adult brain following an injury, whether it is chemical or physical (Font et al. 1997;
Romero-Aleman et al. 2004).
With respect to physical (i.e., mechanical) injuries, the extent of regeneration
depends on the size of the injury. For example, a small incision on the surface of
the DC in the lizard Gallotia galloti will require 240 days to fully recover (RomeroAleman et al. 2004). In contrast, experiments in which a deeper injury affected part
of the DC and DMC in the lizard Lacerta viridis show that at 260 days following
the injury the area has not yet recovered (Minelli et al. 1977). In the latter experiment, the injured area recovers its width but lacks its characteristic cellular layer.
According to the authors, the regeneration is still progressing 240  days after the
injury, and a complete regeneration would probably be possible allowing a longer
term of survival.
Chemical injuries have been studied mostly by administration of the neurotoxin
3-acetylpyridine (3AP) in Podarcis hispanica (Font et  al. 1991, 1995b, 1997;

6  Adult Neurogenesis in Reptiles

183

Lopez-Garcia et al. 1992; Desfilis et al. 1993; Lopez-Garcia 1993; Molowny et al.
1995). 3AP causes neuronal degeneration of several telencephalic areas including
MC, DC, LC, anterior dorsal ventricular ridge (ADVR), NS, and the lateral
amygdaloid nucleus (Font et al. 1991; Font et al. 1997). Within these regions, the
largest neuronal damage affects the cellular layer of the MC, in which 97% of neurons
degenerate by pyknosis 7  days following administration of the neurotoxin
(Fig. 6.4a). The level of injury varies greatly in all other regions of the telencephalon and usually affects less than 50% of their respective cell populations (Font et al.
1997). Neurons in the DMC are also damaged by the toxin, but damage to this area
is delayed and takes place later than the initial injury, suggesting that it may be
caused by denervation as a consequence of the loss of neurons of their main projection from the MC. Six to eight weeks following the injury, most areas are completely
regenerated (Font et al. 1991) (Fig. 6.4c).
Regardless of the type of injury, two main phenomena take place during recovery:
(1) an increase of microglia in the injured area and (2) an increase in the rate of
neurogenesis in the VZ, especially in the area beneath the damaged region (Font
et al. 2001; Romero-Aleman et al. 2004). Microglia increases in number during the
first few days (Font et al. 1995b; Romero-Aleman et al. 2004), and, together with
radial glia cells, they eliminate cellular debris (Lopez-Garcia et al. 1994; Font et al.
1995b; Nacher et al. 1999a,b). In addition to an increase in the number of microglia,
the radial glia fibers simultaneously elongate and show pseudopodial prolongations
surrounding pyknotic nuclei and other cellular debris. Later on, numerous dense
bodies can be seen inside the radial glia cells, which suggests transportation of debris

Fig. 6.4  Scheme of the evolution of a 3-acetylpiridine (3AP) lesion in the medial cortex (MC).
(a) Initially, death affects most of the neurons in the soma layer of the MC by pyknosis.
(b) Afterward, there is a hypertrophy of the ventricular zone (VZ), resulting in the generation of
large numbers of neuroblasts. (c) Two months following the injury, the cell layer of the MC is
completely regenerated. cl cellular layer, ipl inner plexiform layer, opl outer plexiform layer, VZ
ventricular zone

184

S. González-Granero et al.

from the degenerative sites to the ependyma and possibly to the ventricular system
(Font et  al. 1995b). The second phenomenon involves a hypertrophy of the VZ
consequent to a process of reactive neurogenesis, which generates new neurons to
replace those lost by the injury (Fig. 6.4b). It appears that astrocytes are also generated, probably in an effort to help discard debris. This finding suggests that in
contrast to normal neurogenesis, reactive proliferation in the telencephalon of lizards
gives rise to both neurons and glial cells (Font et al. 1995b).
Radial glial cells therefore play an essential role in the regeneration process,
eliminating cellular debris, acting as multipotent stem cells that give rise to neurons
and glia, and guiding newly formed neurons to their final location (Alibardi 1994;
Font et al. 1995b; Chernoff 1996).
One possible explanation for the absence of complete regeneration in the injured
DC of Lacerta viridis following a physical lesion is that the insult also damages
radial glia cells, which appear to be essential for proper regeneration.
There is a different type of regeneration in the CNS of lizards, which is not
driven by neuronal generation, but instead by regrowth of sectioned fibers. Evidence
of this process has been found following the section of the caudal spinal cord in
Anolis carolinensis (Simpson and Duffy 1994) and of the optic nerve in Ctenophorus
ornatus (Beazley et al. 1997) and Gallotia galloti (Lang et al. 1998, 2002).
Neurogenesis can be induced experimentally in other groups of vertebrates such
as fish (Zupanc and Ott 1999), amphibians (Kirsche 1983; Minelli et al. 1987; Del
Grande et al. 1990; Margotta and Morelli 1996), songbirds (Scharff et al. 2000), and
mammals (Gould and Tanapat 1997). Nevertheless, lizards are still unique in their
ability to regenerate large portions of their cerebral cortex bilaterally during adulthood, which may be a result of their ability to generate new neurons in the cortex
under normal conditions (Font et al. 1991). Because the cellular mechanisms that
are brought into play during reactive neurogenesis are basically the same as those
involved in adult neurogenesis, it has been proposed that the presence of adult neurogenesis long after embryonic development explains why regeneration takes place
in certain taxa but not in others (Hulsebosch and Bittner 1980; Kirsche 1983).

6.9 Factors Affecting Adult Neurogenesis
Neurogenesis in reptiles is influenced by several factors that can have a positive or
negative effect on proliferation, migration, and differentiation of newly generated
neurons.
First, there is a great variability between individuals of the same species (LopezGarcia et al. 1990b; Marchioro et al. 2005), probably the result of differences in
sex, age, and/or social status. Generally, studies do not take sex into consideration,
and as a result there are no studies demonstrating that sex can influence neurogenesis. Age has been shown to affect neurogenesis, and as a result differences can be
seen during development that are more or less obvious depending on the species.
In the European lizard Podarcis hispanica, neurogenesis decreases with age, and as

6  Adult Neurogenesis in Reptiles

185

a consequence the rate of neurogenesis is higher in young animals than in adults,
and higher in the latter than in aged specimens (Lopez-Garcia et  al. 1988a;
Molowny et al. 1995). In the tropical lizard Tropidurus hispidus, on the other hand,
neurogenesis is more intense in adults than in juvenile and aged animals (Marchioro
et al. 2005). It is possible that these differences in proliferative neurogenetic activity
are related to the physical or social environment experienced by the experimental
subjects during the survival period preceding their death. Perhaps younger and
nondominant animals are subject to considerable stress in their holding terraria
because of the impossibility of escaping from aggressive adults and dominant lizards.
It is well known that stress suppresses postnatal neurogenesis in the mammalian
hippocampus (Gould and Tanapat 1999), and we ought to consider a similar possibility in lizards. In this sense a recent study conducted in Gallotia galloti shows a
decrease in neurogenesis in captivity in comparison to wild animals (DelgadoGonzalez et al. 2008).
Seasonality may also modulate adult neurogenesis in reptiles, as there is evidence
that neurogenesis increases with long photoperiods and decreases with short ones
(Molowny et al. 1995; Delgado-Gonzalez et al. 2008). A more detailed analysis,
comparing neurogenic rates during different seasons in Gallotia galloti, shows that
spring is the season with the highest neurogenesis, followed by summer, winter, and
autumn (Delgado-Gonzalez et  al. 2008). Such variations could be caused by
changes associated with the spring reproduction season. The relationship between
temperature and neurogenesis has been analyzed in other studies in which it was
observed that under low temperatures, migration, but not proliferation, is reduced
(Ramirez et al. 1997).
Morphological variations related to seasonal changes can be observed by analyzing the VZ. The width of the VZ in the sulci varies seasonally and possibly also in
relationship to changes in proliferation activity (Garcia-Verdugo et al. 2002).
Acknowledgments  Special thanks to Enrique Font, from the Instituto Cavanilles de Biodiver­
sidad y Biologia Evolutiva, and Nader Sanai, MD, at the University of California San Francisco,
for their comments and suggestions on the manuscript. This review was supported by CIBERNED
and TerCel.

References
Ahboucha S, Laalaoui A, Didier-Bazes M, Montange M, Cooper HM, Gamrani H (2003)
Differential patterns of glial fibrillary acidic protein-immunolabeling in the brain of adult lizards.
J Comp Neurol 464:159–171.
Alibardi L (1994) H3-thymidine labeled cerebrospinal fluid contacting cells in the regenerating
caudal spinal cord of the lizard Lampropholis. Ann Anat 176:347–356.
Alvarez-Buylla A (1990) Mechanism of neurogenesis in adult avian brain. Experientia
46:948–955.
Alvarez-Buylla A, Theelen M, Nottebohm F (1990) Proliferation “hot spots” in adult avian ventricular zone reveal radial cell division. Neuron 5:101–109.

186

S. González-Granero et al.

Alvarez-Buylla A, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Mateo AS, Merchant-Larios H (1998) Primary neural
precursors and intermitotic nuclear migration in the ventricular zone of adult canaries.
J Neurosci 18:1020–1037.
Austin CP, Cepko CL (1990) Cellular migration patterns in the developing mouse cerebral cortex.
Development 110:713–732.
Beazley LD, Sheard PW, Tennant M, Starac D, Dunlop SA (1997) Optic nerve regenerates but
does not restore topographic projections in the lizard Ctenophorus ornatus. J Comp Neurol
377:105–120.
Bruce LL, Neary TJ (1995) The limbic system of tetrapods: a comparative analysis of cortical and
amygdalar populations. Brain Behav Evol 46:224–234.
Butler AB, Hodos W (1996) Comparative vertebrate neuroanatomy: Evolution and adaptation.
Wiley-Liss, New York.
Chernoff EA (1996) Spinal cord regeneration: a phenomenon unique to urodeles? Int J Dev Biol
40:823–831.
Davila JC, Guirado S, De la Calle A, Marin-Giron F (1985) Electron microscopy of the medial
cortex in the lizard Psammodromus algirus. J Morphol 185:327–338.
Del Grande P, Franceschini V, Minelli G, Ciani F (1990) Mitotic activity of the telencephalic
matrix areas following optic tectum or pallial cortex lesion in newt. Z Mikrosk Anat Forsch
104:617–624.
Delgado-Gonzalez FJ, Alonso-Fuentes A, Delgado-Fumero A, Garcia-Verdugo JM, GonzalezGranero S, Trujillo-Trujillo CM, Damas-Hernandez MC (2008) Seasonal differences in ventricular proliferation of adult Gallotia galloti lizards. Brain Res 1191:39–46.
Desfilis E, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Font E (1993) Regeneration in the adult lizard brain: further
evidence from 3TH autoradiography. Eur J Neurosci S6:290.
Doetsch F, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (1997) Cellular composition and three-dimensional
organization of the subventricular germinal zone in the adult mammalian brain. J Neurosci
17:5046–5061.
Doetsch F, Caille I, Lim DA, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (1999) Subventricular zone
astrocytes are neural stem cells in the adult mammalian brain. Cell 97:703–716.
Duffy MT, Simpson SB, Liebich DR, Davis BM (1990) Origin of spinal cord axons in the lizard
regenerated tail: supernormal projections from local spinal neurons. J Comp Neurol
293:208–222.
Duffy MT, Liebich DR, Garner LK, Hawrych A, Simpson SB, Jr., Davis BM (1992) Axonal
sprouting and frank regeneration in the lizard tail spinal cord: correlation between changes in
synaptic circuitry and axonal growth. J Comp Neurol 316:363–374.
Font E, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alcantara S, Lopez-Garcia C (1991) Neuron regeneration reverses
3-acetylpyridine-induced cell loss in the cerebral cortex of adult lizards. Brain Res
551:230–235.
Font C, Hoogland PV, Vermeulen van der Zee E, Perez-Clausell J, Martinez-Garcia F (1995a) The
septal complex of the telencephalon of the lizard Podarcis hispanica. I. Chemoarchitectonical
organization. J Comp Neurol 359:117–130.
Font E, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Desfilis E, Perez-Cañellas M (1995b) Neuron-glia interrelations during
3-acetylpyridine-induced degeneration and regeneration in the adult lizard brain. In: Vernadakis
A, Roots B (eds) Neuron-glia interrelations during phylogeny: II. Plasticity and regeneration.
Humana press Inc, Totowa.
Font E, Desfilis E, Perez-Cañellas M, Alcantara S, Garcia-Verdugo JM (1997) 3-Acetylpyridineinduced degeneration and regeneration in the adult lizard brain: a qualitative and quantitative
analysis. Brain Res 754:245–259.
Font E, Desfilis E, Perez-Cañellas MM, Garcia-Verdugo JM (2001) Neurogenesis and neuronal
regeneration in the adult reptilian brain. Brain Behav Evol 58:276–295.
Garcia-Verdugo JM, Berbel PJ, Lopez-Garcia C (1981) [Golgi and electron microscopy study of
cerebral ependymocytes of the lizard Lacerta galloti]. Trab Inst Cajal 72:269–278.
Garcia-Verdugo JM, Berbel-Navarro P, Regidor-Garcia J, Lopez-Garcia C (1984) Ultrastructure
of neuronal cell bodies in the medial cortex of Lacerta galloti. J Hirnforsch 25:187–196.

6  Adult Neurogenesis in Reptiles

187

Garcia-Verdugo JM, Fariñas I, Molowny A, Lopez-Garcia C (1986a) Ultrastructure of putative
migrating cells in the cerebral cortex of Lacerta galloti. J Morphol 189:189–197.
Garcia-Verdugo JM, Llahi S, Fariñas I, Martin V (1986b) Laminar organization of the main
olfactory bulb of Podarcis hispanica: an electron microscopic and Golgi study. J Hirnforsch
27:87–100.
Garcia-Verdugo JM, Llahi S, Ferrer I, Lopez-Garcia C (1989) Postnatal neurogenesis in the olfactory bulbs of a lizard. A tritiated thymidine autoradiographic study. Neurosci Lett
98:247–252.
Garcia-Verdugo JM, Ferron S, Flames N, Collado L, Desfilis E, Font E (2002) The proliferative
ventricular zone in adult vertebrates: a comparative study using reptiles, birds, and mammals.
Brain Res Bull 57:765–775.
Goffinet AM, Daumerie C, Langerwerf B, Pieau C (1986) Neurogenesis in reptilian cortical structures: 3H-thymidine autoradiographic analysis. J Comp Neurol 243:106–116.
Gould E, Tanapat P (1997) Lesion-induced proliferation of neuronal progenitors in the dentate
gyrus of the adult rat. Neuroscience 80:427–436.
Gould E, Tanapat P (1999) Stress and hippocampal neurogenesis. Biol Psychiatry 46:1472–1479.
Holtzman DA (1993) The ontogeny of nasal chemical senses in garter snakes. Brain Behav Evol
41:163–170.
Holtzman DA, Halpern M (1991) Incorporation of 3H-thymidine in telencephalic structures of the
vomeronasal and olfactory systems of embryonic garter snakes. J Comp Neurol 304:
450–466.
Hoogland PV, Vermeulen-Vanderzee E (1995) Efferent connections of the lateral cortex of the
lizard Gekko gecko: evidence for separate origins of medial and lateral pathways from the
lateral cortex to the hypothalamus. J Comp Neurol 352:469–480.
Hulsebosch CE, Bittner GD (1980) Evolution of abilities to regenerate neurons in central nervous
system. Am Nat 115:276–284.
Johnston JB (1916) Evidence of a motor pallium in the forebrain of reptiles. J Comp Neurol
26:469–480.
Kempermann G (2006) Adult neurogenesis: stem cells and neuronal development in the adult
brain. Oxford, New York.
Kirsche W (1983) The significance of matrix zones for brain regeneration and brain transplantation with special consideration of lower vertebrates. In: Wallace RB, Das GD (eds) Neural
tissue transplantation research. Springer, Berlin.
Lang DM, Monzon-Mayor M, Bandtlow CE, Stuermer CA (1998) Retinal axon regeneration in
the lizard Gallotia galloti in the presence of CNS myelin and oligodendrocytes. Glia
23:61–74.
Lang DM, Romero-Aleman MM, Arbelo-Galvan JF, Stuermer CA, Monzon-Mayor M (2002)
Regeneration of retinal axons in the lizard Gallotia galloti is not linked to generation of new
retinal ganglion cells. J Neurobiol 52:322–335.
Lois C, Alvarez-Buylla A (1994) Long-distance neuronal migration in the adult mammalian brain.
Science 264:1145–1148.
Lopez-Garcia C (1993) Postnatal neurogenesis and regeneration in the lizard cerebral cortex.
In: Cuello AC (ed) Restorative neurology. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Lopez-Garcia C, Martinez-Guijarro FJ (1988) Neurons in the medial cortex give rise to Timmpositive boutons in the cerebral cortex of lizards. Brain Res 463:205–217.
Lopez-Garcia C, Tineo PL, Del Corral J (1984) Increase of the neuron number in some cerebral
cortical areas of a lizard, Podarcis hispanica, (Steind., 1870), during postnatal periods of life.
J Hirnforsch 25:255–259.
Lopez-Garcia C, Molowny A, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Ferrer I (1988a) Delayed postnatal neurogenesis in the cerebral cortex of lizards. Brain Res 471:167–174.
Lopez-Garcia C, Molowny A, Rodriguez-Serna R, Garcia Verdugo JM, Martinez-Guijarro FJ
(1988b) Postnatal development of neurons in the telencephalic cortex of lizards. In:
Schwerdtfeger WK, Smeets WJAJ (eds) The forebrain of reptiles: Current concepts of structure and function. Karger, Basel.

188

S. González-Granero et al.

Lopez-Garcia C, Molowny A, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Martinez-Guijarro FJ, Bernabeu A (1990a)
Late generated neurons in the medial cortex of adult lizards send axons that reach the Timmreactive zones. Brain Res Dev Brain Res 57:249–254.
Lopez-Garcia C, Molowny A, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Perez-Sanchez F, Martinez-Guijarro FJ
(1990b) Postnatal neurogenesis in the brain of the lizard Podarcis hispanica. In: Schwerdtfeger
WK, Germroth P (eds) The forebrain in nonmammals: New aspects of structure and development. Springer, Berlin.
Lopez-Garcia C, Molowny A, Martinez-Guijarro FJ, Blasco-Ibanez JM, Luis de la Iglesia JA,
Bernabeu A, Garcia-Verdugo JM (1992) Lesion and regeneration in the medial cerebral cortex
of lizards. Histol Histopathol 7:725–746.
Lopez-Garcia C, Nacher J, Castellano B, Luis de la Iglesia JA, Molowny A (1994) Transitory disappearance of microglia during the regeneration of the lizard medial cortex. Glia 12:52–61.
Luis de la Iglesia JA, Lopez-Garcia C (1997a) A Golgi study of the short-axon interneurons of the
cell layer and inner plexiform layer of the medial cortex of the lizard Podarcis hispanica.
J Comp Neurol 385:565–598.
Luis de la Iglesia JA, Lopez-Garcia C (1997b) A Golgi study of the principal projection neurons
of the medial cortex of the lizard Podarcis hispanica. J Comp Neurol 385:528–564.
Marchioro M, Nunes JM, Ramalho AM, Molowny A, Perez-Martinez E, Ponsoda X, LopezGarcia C (2005) Postnatal neurogenesis in the medial cortex of the tropical lizard Tropidurus
hispidus. Neuroscience 134:407–413.
Margotta V, Morelli A (1996) Encephalic matrix areas and post-natal neurogenesis under natural
and experimental conditions. Anim Biol 5:117–131.
Martinez-Garcia F, Amiguet M, Olucha F, Lopez-Garcia C (1986) Connections of the lateral
cortex in the lizard Podarcis hispanica. Neurosci Lett 63:39–44.
Martinez-Garcia F, Amiguet M, Schwerdfeger WK (1990) Interhemispheric connections through
the pallial commissures in the brain of Podarcis hispanica and Gallotia-Stehlinii (Reptilia,
Lacertidae). J Morphol 205:17–31.
Martinez-Garcia F, Martinez-Marcos A, Lanuza E (2002) The pallial amygdala of amniote vertebrates: evolution of the concept, evolution of the structure. Brain Res Bull 57:463–469.
Martinez-Guijarro FJ, Soriano E, Del Rio JA, Lopez-Garcia C (1991) Zinc-positive boutons in the
cerebral cortex of lizards show glutamate immunoreactivity. J Neurocytol 20:834–843.
Minelli G, del Grande P, Mambelli MC (1977) Preliminary study of the regenerative processes of
the dorsal cortex of the telencephalon of Lacerta viridis. Z Mikrosk Anat Forsch
91:241–256.
Minelli G, Franceschini V, Del Grande P, Ciani F (1987) Newly-formed neurons in the regenerating
optic tectum of Triturus cristatus carnifex. Basic Appl Histochem 31:43–52.
Molowny A, Nacher J, Lopez-Garcia C (1995) Reactive neurogenesis during regeneration of the
lesioned medial cerebral cortex of lizards. Neuroscience 68:823–836.
Monzon-Mayor M, Yanes C, Tholey G, De Barry J, Gombos G (1990) Immunohistochemical
localization of glutamine synthetase in mesencephalon and telencephalon of the lizard Gallotia
galloti during ontogeny. Glia 3:81–97.
Nacher J, Ramirez C, Palop JJ, Molowny A, Luis de la Iglesia JA, Lopez-Garcia C (1999a) Radial
glia and cell debris removal during lesion-regeneration of the lizard medial cortex. Histol
Histopathol 14:89–101.
Nacher J, Ramirez C, Palop JJ, Artal P, Molowny A, Lopez-Garcia C (1999b) Microglial cells
during the lesion-regeneration of the lizard medial cortex. Histol Histopathol 14:103–117.
Nacher J, Soriano S, Varea E, Molowny A, Ponsoda X, Lopez-Garcia C (2002) CRMP-4 expression in the adult cerebral cortex and other telencephalic areas of the lizard Podarcis hispanica.
Brain Res Dev Brain Res 139:285–294.
O’Rourke NA, Sullivan DP, Kaznowski CE, Jacobs AA, McConnell SK (1995) Tangential migration of neurons in the developing cerebral cortex. Development 121:2165–2176.
Peñafiel A, Gutierrez A, Martin R, Perez-Cañellas MM, de la Calle A (1996) A tangential neuronal
migration in the olfactory bulbs of adult lizards. Neuroreport 7:1257–1260.

6  Adult Neurogenesis in Reptiles

189

Perez-Cañellas MM, Garcia-Verdugo JM (1996) Adult neurogenesis in the telencephalon of a
lizard: a [3H]thymidine autoradiographic and bromodeoxyuridine immunocytochemical study.
Brain Res Dev Brain Res 93:49–61.
Perez-Cañellas MM, Font E, Garcia-Verdugo JM (1997) Postnatal neurogenesis in the telencephalon
of turtles: evidence for nonradial migration of new neurons from distant proliferative ventricular
zones to the olfactory bulbs. Brain Res Dev Brain Res 101:125–137.
Perez-Sanchez F, Molowny A, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Lopez-Garcia C (1989) Postnatal neurogenesis in the nucleus sphericus of the lizard, Podarcis hispanica. Neurosci Lett 106:71–75.
Rakic P (1971) Guidance of neurons migrating to the fetal monkey neocortex. Brain Res 33:
471–476.
Ramirez C, Nacher J, Molowny A, Sanchez-Sanchez F, Irurzun A, Lopez-Garcia C (1997)
Photoperiod-temperature and neuroblast proliferation-migration in the adult lizard cortex.
Neuroreport 8:2337–2342.
Ramirez-Castillejo C, Nacher J, Molowny A, Ponsoda X, Lopez-Garcia C (2002) PSA-NCAM
immunocytochemistry in the cerebral cortex and other telencephalic areas of the lizard
Podarcis hispanica: differential expression during medial cortex neuronal regeneration.
J Comp Neurol 453:145–156.
Romero-Aleman MM, Monzon-Mayor M, Yanes C, Lang D (2004) Radial glial cells, proliferating
periventricular cells, and microglia might contribute to successful structural repair in the cerebral cortex of the lizard Gallotia galloti. Exp Neurol 188:74–85.
Scharff C, Kirn JR, Grossman M, Macklis JD, Nottebohm F (2000) Targeted neuronal death
affects neuronal replacement and vocal behavior in adult songbirds. Neuron 25:481–492.
Seri B, Garcia-Verdugo JM, McEwen BS, Alvarez-Buylla A (2001) Astrocytes give rise to new
neurons in the adult mammalian hippocampus. J Neurosci 21:7153–7160.
Simpson SB, Jr., Duffy MT (1994) The lizard spinal cord: a model system for the study of spinal
cord injury and repair. Prog Brain Res 103:229–241.
Stensaas LJ, Stensaas SS (1968) Light microscopy of glial cells in turtles and birds. Z Zellforsch
Mikrosk Anat 91:315–340.
Striedter GF (1997) The telencephalon of tetrapods in evolution. Brain Behav Evol 49:179–213.
Tineo PL, Planelles MD, Del-Corral J (1987) Modifications in cortical ependyma of the lizard,
Podarcis hispanica, during postnatal development. J Hirnforsch 28:485–489.
Ulinski PS (1990) The cerebral cortex of reptiles. In: Jones EG, Peters A (eds) Cerebral cortex.
Plenum, New York.
Ulinski PS, Kanarek DA (1973) Cytoarchitecture of nucleus sphericus in the common boa,
Constrictor constrictor. J Comp Neurol 151:159–174.
Yanes-Mendez C, Martin-Trujillo JM, Perez-Batista MA, Mozon-Mayor M, Marrero A (1988)
Ependymogenesis of the lizard basal areas. I. Ependymal zones. Z Mikrosk Anat Forsch
102:555–572.
Zupanc GK, Ott R (1999) Cell proliferation after lesions in the cerebellum of adult teleost fish:
time course, origin, and type of new cells produced. Exp Neurol 160:78–87.

Part IV

Adult Neurogenesis in the Hippocampus

Chapter 7

From Embryonic to Adult Neurogenesis
in the Dentate Gyrus
Tatsunori Seki

Abstract  Adult neurogenesis is now a very popular phenomenon in neuroscience.
It is widely accepted that neurons continue to be generated in special regions of
the adult brain such as the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the forebrain and the
subgranular zone (SGZ) of the dentate granule cell layer. Adult neurogenesis, however, is not a special type of neurogenesis that occurs only in the adult stage, but is
a part of the persistent neurogenesis that continues from embryonic to adult stages.
Here, we describe the similarities and differences in the properties of progenitors
and cellular architecture of proliferative zones from embryonic to adult periods and
discuss the elements required for persistent neurogenesis.

7.1 Discovery of New Neurons and Their Progenitors
in the Adult Brain
Historically, neurogenesis has been explored exclusively in the embryonic and
early postnatal brain, and for a long time there was almost no study of adult neurogenesis (Jacobson 1991; Gross 2000; Kempermann 2006). In the early stage of
research on embryonic neurogenesis, mitotic cells and cell migration were analyzed
by conventional staining methods such as Nissl and Golgi methods. In the early
1960s, adult neurogenesis was discovered by Altman, who used [3H]thymidine
autoradiography and found newborn neurons in the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the
adult rat dentate gyrus (Altman and Das 1965; Gross 2000; Kempermann 2006).
Thereafter, study of adult neurogenesis was undertaken by a few groups of scientists using the same methods (Kaplan and Hinds 1977; Goldman and Nottbohm
1983; Kaplan 2001; Alvarez-Buylla and Nottebohm 1988; Gould et  al. 1992;

T. Seki (*)
Department of Histology and Neuroanatomy, Tokyo Medical University,
Tokyo 160-8402, Japan
e-mail: sekit@tokyo-med.ac.jp
T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_7, © Springer 2011

193

194

T. Seki

Cameron et al. 1993; Gould and Gross 2002). However, it took about 40 years
before adult neurogenesis became very popular in the field of neuroscience.
One of the reasons why adult neurogenesis was not widely accepted is that autoradiography is time consuming because it requires a few weeks or sometimes more
than 1 month to detect [3H]thymidine-labeled newborn cells, and also only nuclei are
visualized in the proliferating cells that incorporate [3H]thymidine during a short
period of time after the [3H]thymidine injection. Researchers could not obtain
­complete images of all the developing neurons including their dendrites and axons.
In the early 1990s, two new techniques were introduced in this field. In 1991, immunostaining with an antibody against polysialic acid (PSA), a carbohydrate portion of
neural cell adhesion molecules (NCAM), demonstrated that only granule cells located
in the innermost region of the granule cell layer (GCL) express PSA–NCAM (Seki and
Arai 1991). Judging from their distribution and morphology, it was concluded that the
positive cells are newly generated granule cells, implying that PSA is a useful marker
for newborn neurons in the adult hippocampus. Another technique is the labeling of
dividing cells with bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU), a thymidine analogue that was first used
in the embryonic and early postnatal hippocampus by Nowakowski’s group (Miller and
Nowakowski 1988), but not in adults. In 1993, fate analysis using a combination of PSA
immunohistochemistry and BrdU ­labeling clearly demonstrated that newly generated
granule cells express PSA transiently in young adult rats (Seki and Arai 1993b) and also
in aged rats (Seki and Arai 1995). Immunohistochemistry for PSA is the first method
to visualize the entire and detailed shape of all developing neurons in a short time,
including the dendrites and axons, in the adult hippocampus and the subventricular zone
(SVZ) of the adult forebrain (Seki and Arai 1993a,b, 1995). Thereafter, the combination
of PSA immunostaining and BrdU labeling­ came into use by Alvarez-Buylla’s and
Gage’s groups (Rousselot et al. 1995; Kuhn et al. 1996), which greatly contributed to
the progress of this field.
In the late 1990s, multiple immunostainings using various cell markers for stem
cells, immature neurons and glia with BrdU labeling became a standard method to
explore adult neurogenesis (Gross 2000; Kempermann 2006). Additionally, a retrovirus vector bearing the green fluorescence protein (GFP) gene and transgenic mice
such as Nestin-GFP, doublecortin (DCX)-GFP, and proopiomelanocortin (POMC)GFP are now available to label newly generated cells and for time-lapse imaging
and electrophysiology in slices of hippocampal tissues (Yamaguchi et  al. 2000;
Fukuda et al. 2003; Zhao 2007; Enikolopov and Overstreet-Wadiche 2008).
Despite much progress in the techniques, the identity of the neural stem cells or
primary progenitors that give rise to neurons in the adult brain remained unsolved
until 1999. An unexpected answer to this issue was determined by Alvarez-Buylla’s
group (Doetsch et al. 1999; Seri et al. 2001). The stem cells were found to have
features of astrocytes, including glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), brain lipidbinding protein (BLBP), glutamate aspartate transporter (GLAST), and electrophysiological properties of astrocytes; this allowed us to use GFAP-GFP transgenic
mice to identify stem cells (Steiner et al. 2006; Liu et al. 2010).
These techniques have enabled progress in many aspects of the study of the
unique neurogenesis in the adult brain. However, to fully understand the mechanism

7  From Embryonic to Adult Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus

195

and function of adult neurogenesis, it is also important to reveal how neurogenesis
continues from embryonic to adult stages or how prospective stem cell-like progenitors are incorporated into the postnatal GCL during the perinatal period and how
the profile of stem cells is maintained during the postnatal period.

7.2 Embryonic Neurogenesis
7.2.1 Morphogenesis of the Hippocampus
The hippocampal formation is derived from a caudomedial portion of the cortical
primordium, called the cortical hem, whose ventral part makes connections to the
choroid plexus (Fig. 7.1) (Li and Pleasure 2007; Hebert and Fishell 2008; O’Leary
and Sahara 2008; Subramanian and Tole 2009). The progenitors of both pyramidal
cells and granule cells are generated in the ventricular proliferative zone of the
caudomedial pallium formed by a pseudostratified, columnar epithelium. According
to Altman and Bayer (Altman and Bayer 1990a,b,c), the neurogenic hippocampal
neuroepithelium is divided into three discrete parts that are arranged in order from
dorsal to ventral: the ammonic neuroepithelium, the primary dentate neuroepithelium, and the fimbrial glioepithelium.

Fig. 7.1  Schematic drawings of hippocampal development. (a) Coronal section of the forebrain
in embryonic day 16–18 (E16–18) rat embryo. The hippocampus is derived from a caudomedial
portion of the cortical primordium, the cortical hem (colored region). Magenta asterisk, prospective dentate region. (b) Hippocampal primordium at E16–18. The ventricular zone (VZ) is divided
into three regions: ammonic neuroepithelium (ANE), primary dentate neuroepithelium (PDNE),
and fimbrial glioepithelium (FGE). Black asterisk dentate notch, arrow dentate migration. (c)
Proliferative cells in the dentate migration (arrows) form a secondary dentate matrix (SDM,
orange circles) around E21. Then, one dentate migration follows the subpial route to form the
granule cell layer (GCL), and another reaches the hilus to form a tertiary dentate matrix (TDM,
green circles). CP choroid plexus, DG dentate gyrus, F fimbria, NC neocortex, PCL pyramidal
cell layer, V ventricle (Prepared on the basis of Altaman and Bayer 1993a)

196

T. Seki

The developmental processes of the pyramidal layer are roughly similar to those
of the neocortical layer (Altman and Bayer 1990a,b,c). The progenitors of the pyramidal cells are produced in the ventricular zone, migrate radially as does the neocortex (Kriegstein and Noctor 2004; Rakic 2007), and reach their final position to
form the pyramidal cell layer (PCL) during the embryonic period. However, the
morphogenesis of the dentate GCL is fundamentally different from that of the
­hippocampal PCL (Angevine 1965; Stensaas 1967; Schlessinger et al. 1975; Bayer
1980; Eckenhoff and Rakic 1984a; Rickmann et  al. 1987b; Altman and Bayer
1990b; Sievers et al. 1992a; Li and Pleasure 2005; Nakahira and Yuasa 2005).
According to studies by Altman and Bayer using [3H]thymidine autoradiography (Altman and Bayer 1990a,b,c), the putative stem cells of the granule cells initially appear on embryonic day 16 (day E16) in rats in the primary dentate
neuroepithelium, which is located around a ventricular indentation, or the dentate
notch at the dorsal edge of the fimbria (Fig. 7.1a,b). The progenitors generated in
the primary dentate neuroepithelium do not simply radially migrate, but travel
through the dorsal portion of the fimbria to the pial side where the dentate gyrus is
formed. This migratory stream is called dentate migration. These migrating cells
maintain their proliferative capacity and form a secondary dentate matrix along
their migratory stream, including suprafimbrial, subpial, and prospective dentate
regions (Fig. 7.1c). Gradually, the dentate migration divides into two routes. The
first dentate migration follows the subpial route and forms the GCL (the outer
shell), whereas the secondary dentate migration reaches the prospective hilus.
During the perinatal and early postnatal periods, the hilus becomes the main proliferative zone, called the tertiary dentate matrix, which establishes the inner shell
of the GCL while the secondary matrix is diminished (Fig.  7.2a,d). The dual

Fig. 7.2  (a–c) Comparison of the distribution patterns of the Ki67-, S100b-, and Hu-expressing
cells in the dentate gyrus between postnatal day 8 (P8) and P19. (d) Change in the distribution of
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)-labeled cells in rats injected with BrdU on P5 and fixed at 3 (P8) and
7 (P12) days after the injection. CA3 CA3 field of the pyramidal cell layer, GCL granule cell layer.
Bars 50 mm. (Modified, with permission, from Namba et al. 2005)

7  From Embryonic to Adult Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus

197

formation of the outer and inner shells of the GCL has been confirmed by recent
mouse aggregation chimera analysis (Martin et  al. 2002). In rats, only 15% of
granule cells are created during the embryonic period and 85% are generated after
birth (Angevine 1965; Schlessinger et al. 1975; Bayer 1980).

7.2.2 Molecules Regulating Development of the Hippocampus
Modern molecular biological approaches have shed light on the regulatory mechanism underlying the development of the hippocampus or, more restrictedly, the
dentate gyrus (Table 7.1). The initial development of the hippocampus is regulated
by morphogens that are secreted by one of the patterning centers of the cortex, the
cortical hem, which is thought to be a putative organizer for the hippocampus
(Li and Pleasure 2005; O’Leary et al. 2007; Hebert and Fishell 2008; Subramanian
et al. 2009). In the dorsal telencephalon, two patterning centers are mainly ­implicated
Table 7.1  Molecules regulating neurogenesis in embryonic/early postnatal and adult periods
Embryonic/early postnatal period
Adult period
Shh/Gli
Han et al. (2008)
Lai et al. (2003)
Breunig et al. (2008)
Machold et al. (2003)
Lie et al. (2005)
Wnt
Lee et al. (2000)
Zhou et al. (2004)
Machon et al. (2007)
Galceran et al. (2000)
Solberg et al. (2008)
Roelink (2000)
Lhx
Mangale et al. (2008)
EMX2
Pellegrini et al. (1996)
Hong et al. (2007)
Yoshida et al. (1997)
Oldekamp et al. (2004)
Zhao et al. (2006)
SDF-1 (CXCl12)/CXCR4
Lu et al. (2002)
Kolodziej et al. (2008)
Bagri et al. (2002)
Li et al. (2009)
Notch
Breunig et al. (2007)
Salama-Cohen et al. (2006)
Reelin
Forster et al. (2002)
Gong et al. (2007)
Forster et al. (2006)
Muller et al. (2009)
Li et al. (2009)
Sibbe et al. (2009)
Mash1 (Ascl1)
Kim et al. (2007)
Jessberger et al. (2008)
Neurogenin
Galichet et al. (2008)
Ozen et al. (2007)
NeuroD
Miyata et al. (1999)
Gao et al. (2009)
Schwab et al. (2000)
Liu et al. (2000)
DISC1
Enomoto et al. (2009)
Kim et al. (2009)
Meyer and Morris (2009)
Duan et al. (2007)

198

T. Seki

in the arealization: the commissural plate (anterior neural ridge), which expresses
fibroblast growth factors (FGFs), and the cortical hem, a caudomedial portion connected to the choroid plexus, which expresses bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs)
and Wingless/Int proteins (Wnts) (O’Leary et  al. 2007; Hebert and Fishell 2008;
Subramanian et al. 2009). BMPs are required for the formation of the choroid plexus
(Hebert et al. 2002). Wnt3A has been shown to be crucial for the development of the
entire hippocampus (Lee et al. 2000; Roelink 2000). Defects in signaling molecules
in the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, such as LRP6, a coreceptor (Zhou et  al. 2004),
beta-catenin, a cytoplasmic mediator (Machon et  al. 2003), and Lef1, a nuclear
mediator (Galceran et al. 2000; Roelink 2000), are associated with decreased dentate
granule cell production or failure of development of the dentate gyrus. These results
suggest that canonical Wnt signaling is essential in the generation of the granule
cells. Intracellular effectors of BMP and Wnt signaling are reported to regulate the
expression of a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, empty spiracles
homologue 2 (Emx2) (Theil et al. 2002; Shinozaki et al. 2004). Deficiency in Emx2
causes a lack of the dentate GCL (Pellegrini et  al. 1996; Yoshida et  al. 1997).
Additionally, experiments with chimeric mice in which Lhx2-null cells (Lhx2 is a
lim-homeodomain transcription factor regulating neocortical cell fate) are surrounded by wild-type cortical neuroepithelium have shown that ectopic hem tissue
can induce an ectopic hippocampus, suggesting that Lhx2 suppresses the fate of the
cortical hem, which is an organizer for the hippocampus (Mangale et al. 2008).
The formation of the GCL has recently been reported to be regulated by Shh
signal, which is well known to antagonize BMP/Wnt signals in the spinal cord, and
the antagonism controls the dorsoventral polarity and cell differentiation of the
spinal cord. In the developing hippocampus, Shh signaling regulates expansion and
differentiation of neural stem cells through the primary cilia, which are necessary
for vertebrate hedgehog signaling (Davis et al. 2006; Han et al. 2008).
The migration of the dentate granule precursor cells is controlled by factors ­produced
by components around the pia mater, such as the meninges and Cajal-Retzius cells.
A pioneering study by Hartmann et  al. showed that the destruction of meningeal
cells by the injection of 6-hydroxydopamine into the interhemispheric fissure
­prevents the formation of the infrapyramidal blade of the GCL, suggesting that meningeal cells are involved in the development of the GCL (Hartmann et  al. 1992).
Meninges around the hippocampus from the hippocampal fissure to the fimbria is
reported to express stromal cell-derived factor 1 (SDF-1)/CXCl12, a chemokine that
is the only known ligand for CXCR4 chemokine receptor (Lu et al. 2002). CXCR4
mRNA is expressed by dentate progenitor cells, particularly in secondary and
­tertiary dentate matrix including the suprafimbrial, subpial, and hilar regions. In mice
lacking the CXCR4 receptor, precursors of the granule cells fail to reach the GCL
and remain in the hilus, suggesting that SDF-1/CXCR4 chemokine signaling regulates migration of dentate granule cells (Bagri et al. 2002; Lu et al. 2002).
Cajal-Retizus cells are located in the marginal zone of the forebrain, just below
the pia mater, and secrete the extracellular molecule reelin, which has been shown
to be required for proper migration of granule cells (Forster et al. 2002, 2006; Sibbe
et  al. 2009). The reelin binds to the very low density lipoprotein receptor and

7  From Embryonic to Adult Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus

199

apolipoprotein E receptor 2, the cytoplasmic domains of both of which bind to
adaptor protein disabled 1 (Dab1) in neurons and glia cells, and reelin also binds to
beta1-class integrin. In mutant mice that are deficient for reelin (reeler), Dab1
(scrambler), and beta1-integrins, the migration of the granule cells is defective
(Forster et al. 2002). A recent study indicated that reelin signaling is required for
the migration from the subpial pool to the SGZ, whereas SDF-1 (CXCl12)/CXCR4
signaling is essential for the initial formation of the subpial dentate precursor pool
(Li et al. 2009). These molecules are suggested to affect the formation of radial glia
that serve as a scaffold for the migration of the granule cell precursors.
As for the granule cell migration, many papers suggest that, during the perinatal
period, granule cell precursors migrate along radial glial fibers in a manner similar
to that in the neocortex (Eckenhoff and Rakic 1984b; Rickmann et  al. 1987a;
Sievers et al. 1992b; Yuasa 2001; Nakahira and Yuasa 2005; Barry et al. 2008).
The radial glial cells are disorganized in mutants that show malformation of the
dentate gyrus, probably because of the deficient migration of granule cells. Findings
for mutant mice with defects in SDF-1/CXCR4 (Li et al. 2009), reelin, Da1, beta1integrins (Forster et al. 2002), and nuclear factor Ib (Barry et al. 2008) suggest that
these molecules are required for radial glial formation and the proper development
of the GCL. However, it should also be noted that the migration pattern of dentate
granule cells is not simply identical to radial glia-dependent migration of neocortical neuroblasts (Altman and Bayer 1990a). Recently, the cell migration of
dentate granule cells has been shown to be disturbed by knockdown of disruptedin-schizophrenia1 (DISC1), a gene related to major psychiatric disorders (Meyer
and Morris 2009), and a molecule that interacts with DISC1, namely, girdin
(Enomoto et al. 2009).
The production of the dentate granule cells is regulated by molecules that specify
neural cell fate and neuronal differentiation. A study of gain-of-function and loss-offunction of Notch1 showed that Notch1 signaling regulates a variety of events
including proliferation, cell-cycle exit, differentiation of progenitors, and dendritic
morphology of newborn granule cells (Breunig et al. 2007). Neurogenin-2, one of
the bHLH proneural proteins, is reported to have an essential role in the proliferation
and differentiation of dentate progenitors (Galichet et  al. 2008). Another bHLH
protein, NeuroD, is needed for the differentiation of progenitors into granule neurons
(Miyata et al. 1999; Liu et al. 2000; Schwab et al. 2000). These findings suggest that
the neuronal differentiation-related bHLH proteins are required for the production of
dentate granule cells in the developing hippocampus.

7.2.3 Future Problems
Despite the detailed description and molecular analysis of the morphogenesis of the
dentate gyrus, important questions remain regarding the properties of progenitors
in the primary dentate neuroepithelium and secondary proliferative zone, for
example, if they have astroglial characteristics such as neural stem cells in the adult

200

T. Seki

hippocampus, how they differentiate into neurons, and which progenitor cells
become future adult stem cells or granule neurons. Some reports on studies with
GFAP-Cre mice suggest that, during the perinatal period, GFAP-expressing neural
progenitors may produce granule cells (Garcia et  al. 2004; Ganat et  al. 2006).
However, additional work that focuses on individual cells is required to answer
these questions.

7.3 Early Postnatal Neurogenesis
7.3.1 Early Postnatal Development of the Dentate Gyrus
Early postnatal neurogenesis is important to understand the mechanism of persistent
neurogenesis that expands from embryonic to adult periods, because it constitutes
a transition state between embryonic and adult neurogenesis. In the early postnatal
period, there are two types of progenitor derived from secondary dentate matrix:
one type of progenitor migrates below the pial surface and forms the outer shell of
the GCL by postnatal day 5 (P5) in rats, and the other type migrates to the prospective hilus or tertiary dentate matrix (see Fig. 7.1c). The newborn cells generated in
the hilus are added to the inner part of the GCL and form the inner shell of the GCL
(Altman and Bayer 1990a,b,c; Martin et al. 2002). As postnatal time proceeds, the
hilar proliferative zone is confined to the SGZ, the adult proliferative zone.
Therefore, the hilar proliferative zone or the tertiary dentate matrix is the main
source of granule cells during the early postnatal period.
Despite many studies on the embryonic development of the dentate gyrus
(Li and Pleasure 2005) and the properties of adult progenitors (Kriegstein and
Alvarez-Buylla 2009; Johnson et al. 2009; Suh et al. 2009), the exact features of the
early dentate progenitor cells in the hilus were unknown until recently.

7.3.2 Properties of Progenitor Cells
A recent immunohistochemical study showed that the hilus during the first postnatal
week is filled with a dense population of small cells that differ in morphology from
adult types of hilar cell, and express S100b, an astrocyte marker, or Hu, a neuronal
marker, but almost disappear by postnatal week 3, which suggests neural differentiation of progenitor cells in the transiently formed tertiary dentate matrix (see
Fig. 7.2) (Namba et al. 2005). Analyses based on the expression of Ki67, a cellcycle marker, and BrdU labeling have shown that a majority of proliferating cells
in the early postnatal hilus express astrocytic and radial glial markers including
GFAP, S100b, GLAST, and nestin (Fig. 7.3a). Other proliferating cells in the postnatal hilus express neuronal markers such as Hu and MASH-1. Furthermore, fate
analysis using BrdU labeling revealed that a majority of the S100b+ astrocyte-like

7  From Embryonic to Adult Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus

201

Fig. 7.3  (a) BrdU-labeled cells in the hilus express S100b in a rat injected with BrdU at P5 and
fixed 1 day later (P6). (b) A retroviral vector bearing the green fluorescence protein (GFP) gene
was injected into the dentate gyrus of a rat on P5; the rat was fixed on P8. (c) A model of postnatal neurogenesis. The hilus contains nonradial astrocyte-like cells (nA) and radial astrocyte-like
cells (rA). They proliferate and produce three types of cells: granule neurons (gN), star-shaped
astrocytes (sA), and radial glia-like cells (rG). A majority of proliferative astrocyte-like cells
(nA or rA) differentiate into immature neurons (iN) via proliferative neuroblasts (pNb), which
express neuronal marker (green), and/or transient intermediate cells (iC), which express both
neuronal and astrocytic markers (red). A minority of proliferative astrocyte-like cells (nA or rA)
differentiate into star-shaped astrocytes (sA) and radial glia-like cells (rG). The latter cells are
assumed to become neural progenitor cells. GCL granule cell layer, SGZ subgranular zone.
(Modified, with permission, from Namba et al. 2005)

hilar proliferating cells at postnatal day 5 (P5) differentiate into Hu+ immature
neurons at P19. These results indicate that the majority of the GFAP+ hilar proliferating cells or tertiary germinal cells are neural progenitors that produce neuroblasts
(Fig. 7.3c) (Namba et al. 2005). This finding is supported by in vitro experiments
showing that GFAP-expressing cells taken from postnatal hippocampus give rise to
neurons in culture (Laywell et al. 2000; Malatesta et al. 2000; Imura et al. 2003).
Additionally, our recent time-lapse experiments suggest that GFAP+ primary cells
are intermediate progenitor-like cells that undergo symmetrical cell division to
generate a pair of immature neurons or neuronal precursors (Namba et  al. 2007;
Seki et al. 2009).
S100b expression in GFAP+ neural progenitor cells seems to differ between
early postnatal rats and mice, and even in rats between early postnatal and adult
stages. In contrast to the findings for early postnatal rats, our preliminary experiments showed that astrocytic proliferating cells in early postnatal mice exhibit no

202

T. Seki

S100b expression (unpublished data). In both rats and mice of adult age,
­GFAP-expressing neural progenitors are S100b negative (Filippov et  al. 2003;
Kempermann 2006; Seki et al. 2007). Therefore, in rats, S100b expression may be
one of the traits of early postnatal GFAP+ progenitors and could be a useful molecular marker to distinguish early postnatal progenitors from adult ones.

7.3.3 Migration
Fate analysis using BrdU has also shown that proliferating cells in the early postnatal hilus eventually migrate to the inner portion of the GCL. Furthermore, retrovirus-GFP labeling experiments have shown that Hu+/GFP+ positive migrating
neuroblasts have a very long trailing process with varicosities (see Fig.  7.3b)
(Namba et al. 2005). Interestingly, similar long trailing processes of migrating cells
have been reported in the developing neocortex (Schwartz et  al. 1991; Hatanaka
and Murakami 2002), and it is suggested that the long trailing processes of the
migrating cells become axons. Therefore, Hu+/GFP+ hilar neuroblasts could
migrate, extending a trailing process or axon so that the tip of the process is left
near the CA3c pyramidal cells, which are a target of the granule cell axons.
Contact of the migrating neuroblasts with radial processes of radial glia cells in
the postnatal hilus has been previously reported (Eckenhoff and Rakic 1984a;
Rickmann et al. 1987b). The radial glial processes are proposed to act as a scaffold
for the migrating neuroblasts (Eckenhoff and Rakic 1984a; Rickmann et al. 1987b;
Forster et al. 2002). Recent retrovirus-GFP experiments show that relatively small
immature neurons, with characteristic signs of moving cells, make contact with
both astrocytic processes and their cell bodies (Namba et al. 2005). Although the
astrocytic processes could play a role as a scaffold for the migrating cells, as considered previously, another possibility is that the processes contribute to cell-to-cell
interaction between radial astrocytes and immature neurons as has been suggested
in the developing neocortex (Seki and Arai 1999; Alonso 2001; Seki 2003; Ever
and Gaiano 2005).

7.3.4 Molecules Regulating Postnatal Development of the GCL
As the GCL continuously develops throughout the perinatal period, the early postnatal development of the GCL shares similar molecular mechanisms with the
embryonic one (see Table 7.1). Attention should be particularly paid to molecules
that regulate the expansion and differentiation of progenitors, such as Shh (Han
et al. 2008) and neurogenin 2 (Galichet et al. 2008), and migration such as SDF-1/
CXCl12 secreted by the meninges (Bagri et al. 2002; Lu et al. 2002) and reelin by
Cajal-Retzius cells (Forster et  al. 2002, 2006; Sibbe et  al. 2009), both of which
affect the arrangement of the radial glial scaffold.

7  From Embryonic to Adult Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus

203

7.3.5 Future Problems
Several previous studies have described the presence of GFAP-positive proliferative
glioblasts in the postnatal hilar region that are integrated into the SGZ and become
radial glial cells (Eckenhoff and Rakic 1984a; Rickmann et al. 1987b; Sievers et al.
1992a; Yuasa 2001). It is likely that a small population of the hilar astrocytic
proliferating cells differentiate into radial glial cells in the SGZ, although recent
BrdU- and retrovirus-eGFP-labeling experiments have demonstrated that a majority of the proliferative cells similar to glioblasts give rise to neurons(Namba et al.
2005). Because radial glial cells in the adult GCL are considered to be adult neural
stem cells, it is hypothesized that the radial glial cells derived from the hilar proliferative zone and integrated into the GCL become adult neural stem cells, implying
that the hilar proliferative zone is a source of the adult neural progenitors as well as
granule cells(Namba et al. 2005). Further experiments should be conducted to distinguish between the two types of GFAP+ cells in the early postnatal hilus: one to
produce neurons and the other to become adult neural stem cells.

7.4 Adult Neurogenesis
7.4.1 Adult Neurogenic Region
Neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus occurs in the SGZ, a narrow zone between
the hilus and GCL (Fig. 7.4a). The SGZ is proposed to have a special microenvironment, called a niche, which possesses the ability to maintain the properties of stem
cells and regulate their differentiation. The presence of a niche in the dentate gyrus
was initially indicated by transplantation experiments. When neural stem cells or
progenitors from neurogenic or nonneurogenic regions are transplanted into the
dentate gyrus and the transplanted cells finally settle down in the SGZ, they can
differentiate into neurons (Suhonen et al. 1996; Shihabuddin et al. 2000). However,
when they migrate to CA1 and CA3 PCLs, they become glial cells (Shihabuddin
et al. 2000). Furthermore, when the neural stem or progenitor cells from neurogenic
regions are transplanted into nonneurogenic regions such as the cerebellum and
spinal cord, they only differentiate into glia (Suhonen et  al. 1996; Shihabuddin
et al. 2000).
The architecture of niches has been intensively investigated in the SVZ of the
adult forebrain that lies adjacent to the ependymal cell layer lining the lateral ventri­
cular wall and contains stem cells which contact the ventricle by a thin cellular
protrusion (Lathia et al. 2007; Riquelme et al. 2008; Kriegstein and Alvarez-Buylla
2009; Miller and Gauthier-Fisher 2009; Suh et al. 2009). The SVZ niche is composed of stem cells, intermediate progenitors, neuroblasts, and blood vessels with
specialized basal lamina called fractones (Andreu-Agullo et al. 2009).
Similarly, the SGZ niche is composed of stem cells, intermediate progenitors,
neuroblasts, and blood vessels. However, the niche of the SGZ is not related to the

204

T. Seki

Fig. 7.4  (a) Polysialic acid-positive (PSA+) immature neurons, Ki67+ proliferating cells, and BrdU+
3-day-old newborn neurons in the hippocampus of 2-month-old rats. (b) b-Catenin and N-cadherin
exhibit identical distributions on the plasma membrane of cluster cells. Some cells also express PSA.

7  From Embryonic to Adult Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus

205

ventricle and does not contain ventricle-contacting stem cells. It is not known if the
fractons are included in the SGZ niches. These differences imply that the SGZ
niches may lack some of the properties exhibited by the SVZ niches.
The stem cells of both SVZ and SGZ are GFAP+ astrocyte-like cells (Doetsch
et al. 1999; Seri et al. 2001; Kriegstein and Alvarez-Buylla 2009). In the early process of adult neurogenesis, GFAP+ primary progenitors, neuronal marker-positive
intermediate progenitors, and postmitotic neuroblasts make clusters (Fig.  7.4)
(Palmer et al. 2000; Seki 2002; Seri et al. 2004; Seki et al. 2007). In the clusters, the
proliferating cells and GFAP+ nonproliferating cells sometimes engulf neighboring
cells by their short processes (Fig. 7.4e) (Palmer et al. 2000; Seki 2002; Seri et al.
2004; Shapiro et  al. 2005; Seki et  al. 2007). Cellular components of the clusters
appear to serve as neurogenic niches. Neural stem cells cocultured on astrocytes
from the hippocampus are induced to differentiate neurons, suggesting that hippocampal astrocytes regulate the cell fate of neural stem cells (Song et al. 2002).
Blood vessels sometimes run along the border between the GCL and hilus or the
neurogenic SGZ. The clusters of proliferating cells make contact with blood capillaries, particularly their branching points (Palmer et al. 2000; Seki 2003), although
not all the clusters are associated with blood capillaries. It has been proposed that
signals from cellular components of blood vessels regulate neurogenesis in the SGZ.
One of the candidates of the signals is vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
which induces both hippocampal neurogenesis and angiogenesis (Cao et al. 2004).
It is thought that there are signaling systems via soluble factors secreted by niche
cells and via cell-to-cell contact between cellular components of the niches, both of
which allow stem cells to self-renew or differentiate into neuron-committed cells.
These regulatory molecules are discussed next.

7.4.2 Properties of Adult Progenitors
Stem cell-like primary progenitors of the adult dentate neurogenic regions possess
astrocytic features and express GFAP (Seri et al. 2001). The primary progenitors
develop gradually into neurons through certain steps. According to the models
proposed by Kempermann and Alvarez-Buylla (Kempermann et al. 2004; Kriegstein
and Alvarez-Buylla 2009), the primary progenitors, termed type 1 cells or B cells,
exhibit radial morphology, express some astrocytic and radial glial markers, such

Fig. 7.4  (continued) (c) Cluster cells (1, 2) in the SGZ express glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP), Hu, and Ki67 simultaneously. (d) Cluster cells (1, 2) in the SGZ express GFAP, Hu, and
Mash1 simultaneously. (e) Retrovirus-GFP-labeled 3-day-old cells (E1–3) and 5-day-old cells
(E4). Ki67+ proliferating cells (1, 2) form a cluster, and a Ki67− cell is strongly positive for PSA
(E1). Note the cells with short (E2), long (E3), or basal processes (E4) that are closely associated with Ki67+ proliferating cells. (f) Cell clustering, migration, neurite formation, and expression of specific markers in adult hippocampal neurogenesis. (Modified, with permission, from
Seki et al. 2007)

206

T. Seki

as GFAP, GLAST, and BLBP, and divide slowly. The next progenitors with
tangentially oriented processes, called type 2–3 or type D cells, express some neuronal
markers including PSA, doublecortin, and Tbr2 (Steiner et  al. 2006; Seki et  al.
2007; Hodge et al. 2008). They proliferate actively and serve as amplifying progenitors or intermediate progenitors. The primary and intermediate progenitors have
different electrophysiological properties (Filippov et al. 2003; Fukuda et al. 2003).
In this regard, recent studies using a neuronal marker Hu and proneural protein
Mash1 (Ascl1) indicate that the GFAP+ proliferating cells are not a single group but
are divided into two groups: GFAP+ cells with or without neuronal marker expression (Fig. 7.4c,d,f) (Seki et al. 2007; Liu et al. 2010). In adult rat experiments with
a proliferating cell marker, Ki67, about one-third of proliferating cells in the SGZ
exhibit GFAP expression. The majority of GFAP+ proliferating cells also express a
neuronal marker, Hu, and the half proneural protein Mash1 (Ascl1), suggesting that
the majority of GFAP+ proliferative precursor cells are committed to the neuronal
cell lineage. Furthermore, some of the Hu+/GFAP+ and MASH-1+/GFAP+ cells
have a radial process, although GFAP+ radial cells (or radial glial cells) were previously considered to be primary precursor cells. These results suggest that at least the
subpopulation of GFAP+ radial cells is already committed to the neuronal cell
­lineage and the identity of the GFAP+ radial cells should be reconsidered. It is
assumed that the Hu+/GFAP+ and MASH-1+/GFAP+ proliferating cells could represent an intermediate state or early intermediate progenitors when proliferative
GFAP+ cells differentiate into proliferative Hu+ neuronal precursor cells.
The progeny or daughter cells of GFAP+ primary progenitors can be analyzed
in transgenic mice that express enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) under
the control of the mouse GFAP promoter (mGFAPp-eGFP Tg mice) (Suzuki et al.
2003), because eGFP persists in the progeny for a short time after the GFAP immunoreactivity disappears as a result of the high stability of exogenous eGFP compared
with that of endogenous GFAP (Corish and Tyler-Smith 1999; Verkhusha et  al.
2003; Ozen et al. 2007; Hodge et al. 2008; Kim et al. 2008). In the mGFAPp-eGFP
Tg mice, proliferating eGFP+ cells consist of GFAP+ and GFAP– cells, both of
which express a stem cell marker, Sox2 (Liu et  al. 2010). The subpopulation of
proliferating GFAP+/eGFP+ cells express proneural protein Mash1 and neuronal
marker Hu, whereas the proliferating GFAP−/eGFP+ cells express additional
immature neuronal markers, such as polysialic acid–neural cell adhesion molecule
(PSA–NCAM) and doublecortin. BrdU-labeling analysis suggests that GFAP−/
eGFP+ cells are progenitors that transiently appear during neuronal differentiation
of GFAP+/eGFP+ cells. Taken together, these studies indicate the existence of early
intermediate progenitors that express both GFAP and neuronal markers such as
Hu and Mash1(Liu et al. 2010). These adult intermediate progenitors may divide
symmetrically to produce neurons, such as GFAP+ progenitors in early postnatal
dentate gyrus (Namba et al. 2007; Seki et al. 2009).
This model can explain interesting previously reported results that showed a
transient increase in GFAP+ progenitors during adult neurogenesis in normal and
voluntarily exercised mice (Steiner et al. 2004). In this respect, if the GFAP+ cells
are neural stem cells that divide symmetrically to produce a stem cell and a neuron,
the GFAP+ cells never decrease in number after they have increased once. Actually,

7  From Embryonic to Adult Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus

207

it was concluded that the transient increase is caused by gliogenesis. However, if
the GFAP+ cells are intermediate cells that divide symmetrically to produce a pair
of neurons, they exhibit a transient increase in GFAP+ intermediate progenitors and
then an increase in neurons. This latter model can explain an increase in neuron
number with voluntary wheel running.

7.4.3 Migration
Although progenitor cells initially make clusters, immature neurons eventually line
up along the SGZ separately, suggesting that they may migrate tangentially from
clusters through the SGZ (Fig.  7.4a). In fact, BrdU/Ki67 immunohistochemistry
has shown that about 80% of cell division occurs in the clusters, and within a week
75% of the cells generated inside the clusters migrate to the outside (Seki et  al.
2007). Furthermore, retrovirus-GFP labeling indicates that proliferating cells inside
clusters have short tangential processes, and when postmitotic cells withdraw from
the proliferative site and migrate tangentially, they extend long tangential processes
(Seki et al. 2007). In agreement with these results, several studies have shown short
tangential processes in type 2 neuron-like progenitors (van Praag et  al. 2002;
Fukuda et  al. 2003; Alvarez-Buylla and Lim 2004; Kempermann et  al. 2004;
Esposito et  al. 2005; Tozuka et  al. 2005). Furthermore, several reports have
described long tangential processes of immature granule cells in the adult dentate
GCL in normal and epileptic rats (Seress and Mrzljak 1987; Spigelman et al. 1998;
Nacher et al. 2001; Dashtipour et al. 2002; Seki 2002; Jones et al. 2003; Ribak et al.
2004; Seri et al. 2004; Esposito et al. 2005; Shapiro and Ribak 2005; Seki et al.
2007), although the function of these processes remains unknown.
During the tangential migration, the migrating cells leave a tangential process
behind in the clusters containing proliferating progenitors (Fig.  7.4e,f) (Seki et  al.
2007). In this regard, it is worth noting that similar intercellular relationships have
already been well studied in the developing neocortex (Rakic 1971; Marin-Padilla
1998; Miyata et  al. 2001; Tamamaki et  al. 2001; Gaiano and Fishell 2002; Fujita
2003; Rakic 2003; Tabata and Nakajima 2003; Noctor et al. 2004; Ever and Gaiano
2005), where the migrating neuroblasts make contact with the processes of radial glial
cells that have been demonstrated to be neural progenitor cells (Rakic 1971; MarinPadilla 1998; Miyata et  al. 2001; Tamamaki et  al. 2001; Fujita 2003; Rakic 2003;
Tabata and Nakajima 2003; Noctor et al. 2004); this work suggests that embryonic
and adult neurogenesis may share similar mechanisms of neuronal development.

7.4.4 Molecules Regulating Hippocampal Adult Neurogenesis
The initial stage of adult neurogenesis is thought to be regulated by signaling molecules that are expressed or secreted by cellular components of neurogenic niches
(Johnson et al. 2009; Suh et al. 2009). Although the later stage of adult neurogenesis

208

T. Seki

is controlled by neurotransmitters and neural activity (Johnson et al. 2009; Suh et al.
2009), this discussion focuses on the regulation of the initial stage because of
limited space in this review.
Despite the difference in neurogenic niches among embryonic, early postnatal,
and adult dentate gyrus, common signals are reported to contribute to the regulation
of adult neurogenesis. Wnt3, a key regulator during the early morphogenesis of the
hippocampus, is expressed in the SGZ of the adult hippocampus (Shimogori et al.
2004). A study using overexpression of Wnt3 and blocking of Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling suggested that Wnt signaling controls neuronal differentiation of primary
progenitors and the proliferation of neuron-committed progenitors (Lie et al. 2005).
Furthermore, strong b-catenin expression is found to be confined to the plasma
membrane of clustering cells of the SGZ in the adult hippocampus, and the distribution of the b-catenin expression on the plasma membrane exactly coincides with
N-cadherin expression (Seki et al. 2007). b-Catenin is a multifunctional molecule
that serves as a linker protein of cell adhesion molecules, cadherins, and a mediator
of Wnt signaling pathway (Nelson and Nusse 2004). As Wnt/b-catenin signaling
can control cell proliferation in adult hippocampal neural progenitors, b-catenin in
the clusters could function in Wnt signaling pathway to regulate adult neurogenesis
(Madsen et al. 2003; Lie et al. 2005). However, the coincidence of b-catenin and
N-cadherin in the clusters suggests another possibility that b-catenin works in a
signaling system mediated by N-cadherin-mediated cell-to-cell contact. Because
the intercellular interaction by N-cadherin/b-catenin is reported to regulate proliferation and differentiation of neural stem cells in the developing neocortex (Noles
and Chenn 2007), the N-cadherin/b-catenin in the adult hippocampus may contribute
to control the proliferation of adult neural progenitors.
Shh is reported to be required for maintenance of stemness in dentate progenitor
cells (Machold et  al. 2003). Long-term mapping experiments show that Shhresponding cells in the GCL have the property of quiescent neural stem cells that
can self-renew and produce neurons for more than a year (Ahn and Joyner 2005).
The upregulation of Shh by injection of adeno-associated viral vector-Shh into the
dentate gyrus leads to increases in hippocampal neural progenitors (Lai et al. 2003).
The removal of Shh signaling in Shh- or smoothened-deficient mice results in a
dramatic decrease in the number of dentate progenitor cells (Machold et al. 2003).
Notch signaling can control proliferation, cell fate of progenitors, and dendritic
morphology of newborn granule cells during the postnatal period, but in the adult
hippocampus this molecule is involved in controlling dendritic development
(Salama-Cohen et al. 2006). Reelin is shown to regulate migration of neuroblasts in
normal and epileptic hippocampus (Gong et al. 2007; Muller et al. 2009). Prolonged
seizures decrease reelin expression in the adult dentate gyrus and lead to ectopic
migration and aberrant integration of newly generated granule cells (Gong et  al.
2007). In agreement with the findings of in vivo experiments, reelin was found to
cause detachment of chain-migrating neuroblasts in explant cultures of dentate gyrus.
Although our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying regulation
of adult neurogenesis has recently advanced, exact information is needed as to
which cells express or produce the regulatory molecules and which cells are
affected by them.

7  From Embryonic to Adult Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus

209

7.4.5 Perspective
Finally, I would like to compare the development of the GCL with that of other
brain regions (Fig. 7.5). In the development of all brain regions, initial neural stem
cells are located in the VZ. In the developing neocortex, stem cells with radial
morphology are situated in the VZ, and their radial processes extend throughout the
entire cortical layer to the pial surface and make direct contact with the basal lamina.
The stem cells produce intermediate progenitors that are detached from the
­ventricular surface; the intermediate progenitors proliferate in the SVZ and give
rise to neurons during the embryonic period but disappear soon after birth.
In the development of the SVZ stem cells that produce olfactory interneurons,
embryonic stem cells change their initial position from the VZ to the SVZ during
the postnatal period, but adult stem cells maintain contact with the ventricular surface
with a thin process.
In the development of the GCL of the cerebellum, ventricular stem cells migrate
to the external GCL just below the pial surface and relatively close to the choroid
plexus, proliferate there, then migrate further to the internal GCL and become
­cerebellar granule cells. The cerebellar neurogenesis ceases by postnatal week 3 in
rodents.
Interestingly, the dentate gyrus seems to have some similarities in morphogenesis
with the other three brain regions. For example, the hippocampus and cerebellum are
derived from neuroepithelium around the edge (cortical hem and rhombic lip) of the
dorsal portions of telencephalon and metencephalon, respectively, both of which
are attached to the choroid plexus. Both progenitors are generated in the ventricular

Fig. 7.5  Comparison of neurogenesis among the neocortex, dentate gyrus, subventricular zone of
the forebrain, and cerebellum. CP choroid plexus, EGL external granular layer, IP intermediate
progenitors, GCL granule cell layer, SDM secondary dentate matrix, SGZ subgranular zone, SVZ
subventricular zone, TDM tertiary dentate matrix, VZ ventricular zone

210

T. Seki

zone and migrate to the subpial portion in which secondary proliferative zones (or
secondary matrix) are formed. The progenitors in the secondary proliferative zone
give rise to small interneurons (granule cells). Both neuronal productions in the
subpial regions continue into the early postnatal period to form the cerebellar and
dentate GCLs. There may be a similar mechanism in early postnatal neurogenesis in
the subpial regions of the dentate and cerebellum. Furthermore, in the dentate gyrus,
progenitor cells of the secondary dentate matrix migrate to the hilus and establish
the tertiary dentate matrix. During the late postnatal period, the progenitors of the
tertiary dentate matrix are gradually confined to the SGZ, which contains adult stem
cell-like cells. Therefore, the prospective adult stem cell-like cells may migrate from
the ventricular zone to the SGZ via the secondary and tertiary dentate matrix.
To determine how dentate neurogenesis continues from embryonic to adult stages,
further studies are needed to show how dentate progenitors are influenced by each
niche including the ventricular zone, subpial region, hilus, and SGZ.
Acknowledgments  I thank Dr. Takashi Namba for careful reading of the manuscript and valuable
comments.

References
Ahn, S and Joyner, A L (2005) In vivo analysis of quiescent adult neural stem cells responding to
Sonic hedgehog. Nature 437: 894–897
Alonso, G (2001) Proliferation of progenitor cells in the adult rat brain correlates with the presence
of vimentin-expressing astrocytes. Glia 34: 253–266
Altman, J and Bayer, S A (1990a) Migration and distribution of two populations of hippocampal
granule cell precursors during the perinatal and postnatal periods. J Comp Neurol 301: 365–381
Altman, J, and Bayer, S A (1990b) Mosaic organization of the hippocampal neuroepithelium and
the multiple germinal sources of dentate granule cells. J Comp Neurol 301: 325–342
Altman, J and Bayer, S A (1990c) Prolonged sojourn of developing pyramidal cells in the intermediate zone of the hippocampus and their settling in the stratum pyramidale. J Comp Neurol
301: 343–364
Altman, J and Das, G D (1965) Autoradiographic and histological evidence of postnatal
hippocampal neurogenesis in rats. J Comp Neurol 124: 319–335
Alvarez-Buylla, A and Lim, D A (2004) For the long run: maintaining germinal niches in the adult
brain. Neuron 41: 683–686
Alvarez-Buylla, A and Nottebohm, F (1988) Migration of young neurons in adult avian brain.
Nature 335: 353–354
Andreu-Agullo, C, Morante-Redolat, J M, Delgado, A C et al (2009) Vascular niche factor PEDF
modulates Notch-dependent stemness in the adult subependymal zone. Nat Neurosci 12:
1514–1523
Angevine, J B, Jr. (1965) Time of neuron origin in the hippocampal region. An autoradiographic
study in the mouse. Exp Neurol: Suppl 2: 1–70
Bagri, A, Gurney, T, He, X et  al (2002) The chemokine SDF1 regulates migration of dentate
granule cells. Development 129: 4249–4260
Barry, G, Piper, M, Lindwall, C et  al (2008) Specific glial populations regulate hippocampal
morphogenesis. J Neurosci 28: 12328–12340
Bayer, S A (1980) Development of the hippocampal region in the rat. I. Neurogenesis examined
with 3H-thymidine autoradiography. J Comp Neurol 190: 87–114

7  From Embryonic to Adult Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus

211

Breunig, J J, Silbereis, J, Vaccarino, F M et  al (2007) Notch regulates cell fate and dendrite
morphology of newborn neurons in the postnatal dentate gyrus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
104: 20558–20563
Breunig, J J, Sarkisian, M R, Arellano, J I et al (2008) Primary cilia regulate hippocampal neurogenesis by mediating sonic hedgehog signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105: 13127–13132
Cameron H A, Woolley C S, McEwen B S et al (1993) Differentiation of newly born neurons and
glia in the dentate gyrus of the adult rat. Neuroscience 56: 337–344
Cao, L, Jiao, X, Zuzga, D S et  al (2004) VEGF links hippocampal activity with neurogenesis,
learning and memory. Nat Genet 36: 827–835
Corish, P and Tyler-Smith, C (1999) Attenuation of green fluorescent protein half-life in mammalian cells. Protein Eng 12: 1035–1040
Dashtipour, K, Yan, X X, Dinh, T T et  al (2002) Quantitative and morphological analysis of
dentate granule cells with recurrent basal dendrites from normal and epileptic rats.
Hippocampus 12: 235–244
Davis, E E, Brueckner, M and Katsanis, N (2006) The emerging complexity of the vertebrate
cilium: new functional roles for an ancient organelle. Dev Cell 11: 9–19
Doetsch, F, Caille, I, Lim, D A et al (1999) Subventricular zone astrocytes are neural stem cells
in the adult mammalian brain. Cell 97: 703–716
Duan, X, Chang, J H, Ge, S et  al (2007) Disrupted-in-Schizophrenia 1 regulates integration of
newly generated neurons in the adult brain. Cell 130: 1146–1158
Eckenhoff, M F and Rakic, P (1984) Radial organization of the hippocampal dentate gyrus: a
Golgi, ultrastructural, and immunocytochemical analysis in the developing rhesus monkey.
J Comp Neurol 223: 1–21
Enikolopov, G and Overstreet-Wadiche, L (2008) The use of reporter mouse lines to study adult
neurogenesis. In: Gage, F. H. et al. (eds.), Adult neurogenesis. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press, New York
Enomoto, A, Asai, N, Namba, T et  al (2009) Roles of disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1-interacting
protein girdin in postnatal development of the dentate gyrus. Neuron 63: 774–787
Esposito, M S, Piatti, V C, Laplagne, D A et  al (2005) Neuronal differentiation in the adult
hippocampus recapitulates embryonic development. J Neurosci 25: 10074–10086
Ever, L and Gaiano, N (2005) Radial ‘glial’ progenitors: neurogenesis and signaling. Curr Opin
Neurobiol 15: 29–33
Filippov, V, Kronenberg, G, Pivneva, T et al (2003) Subpopulation of nestin-expressing progenitor
cells in the adult murine hippocampus shows electrophysiological and morphological characteristics of astrocytes. Mol Cell Neurosci 23: 373–382
Forster, E, Tielsch, A, Saum, B et al (2002) Reelin, disabled 1, and beta 1 integrins are required
for the formation of the radial glial scaffold in the hippocampus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:
13178–13183
Forster, E, Jossin, Y, Zhao, S et al (2006) Recent progress in understanding the role of Reelin in radial
neuronal migration, with specific emphasis on the dentate gyrus. Eur J Neurosci 23: 901–909
Fujita, S (2003) The discovery of the matrix cell, the identification of the multipotent neural stem
cell and the development of the central nervous system. Cell Struct Funct 28: 205–228
Fukuda, S, Kato, F, Tozuka, Y et al (2003) Two distinct subpopulations of nestin-positive cells in
adult mouse dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 23: 9357–9366
Gaiano, N and Fishell, G (2002) The role of notch in promoting glial and neural stem cell fates.
Annu Rev Neurosci 25: 471–490
Galceran, J, Miyashita-Lin, E M, Devaney, E et al (2000) Hippocampus development and generation
of dentate gyrus granule cells is regulated by LEF1. Development 127: 469–482
Galichet, C, Guillemot, F, Parras, C M (2008) Neurogenin 2 has an essential role in development
of the dentate gyrus. Development 135: 2031–2041
Ganat, Y M, Silbereis, J, Cave, C et al (2006) Early postnatal astroglial cells produce multilineage
precursors and neural stem cells in vivo. J Neurosci 26: 8609–8621
Gao, Z, Ure, K, Ables, J L et al (2009) Neurod1 is essential for the survival and maturation of
adult-born neurons. Nat Neurosci 12: 1090–1092

212

T. Seki

Garcia, A D, Doan, N B, Imura, T et  al (2004) GFAP-expressing progenitors are the principal
source of constitutive neurogenesis in adult mouse forebrain. Nat Neurosci 7: 1233–1241
Goldman, S A and Nottbohm, F (1983) Neuronal production, migration, and differentiation in a vocal
control nucleus of the adult female canary brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 80: 2390–2394
Gong, C, Wang, T W, Huang, H S et al (2007) Reelin regulates neuronal progenitor migration in
intact and epileptic hippocampus. J Neurosci 27: 1803–1811
Gould, E and Gross, C G (2002) Neurogenesis in adult mammals: some progress and problems.
J Neurosci 22: 619–623
Gould, E, Cameron, H A, Daniels, D C et al (1992) Adrenal hormones suppress cell division in
the adult rat dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 12: 3642–3650
Gross, C G (2000) Neurogenesis in the adult brain: death of a dogma. Nat Rev Neurosci 1: 67–73
Han, Y G, Spassky, N, Romaguera-Ros, M et al (2008) Hedgehog signaling and primary cilia are
required for the formation of adult neural stem cells. Nat Neurosci 11: 277–284
Hartmann, D, Sievers, J, Pehlemann, F W et al (1992) Destruction of meningeal cells over the
medial cerebral hemisphere of newborn hamsters prevents the formation of the infrapyramidal
blade of the dentate gyrus. J Comp Neurol 320: 33–61
Hatanaka, Y and Murakami, F (2002) In vitro analysis of the origin, migratory behavior, and
maturation of cortical pyramidal cells. J Comp Neurol 454: 1–14
Hebert, J M and Fishell, G (2008) The genetics of early telencephalon patterning: some assembly
required. Nat Rev Neurosci 9: 678–685
Hebert, J M, Mishina, Y and McConnell, S K (2002) BMP signaling is required locally to pattern
the dorsal telencephalic midline. Neuron 35: 1029–1041
Hodge, R D, Kowalczyk, T D, Wolf, S A et al (2008) Intermediate progenitors in adult hippocampal neurogenesis: Tbr2 expression and coordinate regulation of neuronal output. J Neurosci
28: 3707–3717
Hong, S M, Liu, Z, Fan, Y et  al (2007) Reduced hippocampal neurogenesis and skill reaching
performance in adult Emx1 mutant mice. Exp Neurol 206: 24–32
Imura, T, Kornblum, H I and Sofroniew, M V (2003) The predominant neural stem cell isolated
from postnatal and adult forebrain but not early embryonic forebrain expresses GFAP.
J Neurosci 23: 2824–2832
Jacobson, M (1991) Developmental neurobiology. Plenum Press, New York
Jessberger, S, Toni, N, Clemenson, G D, Jr. et al (2008) Directed differentiation of hippocampal
stem/progenitor cells in the adult brain. Nat Neurosci 11: 888–893
Johnson, M A, Ables, J L and Eisch, A J (2009) Cell-intrinsic signals that regulate adult neurogenesis in vivo: insights from inducible approaches. BMB Rep 42: 245–259
Jones, S P, Rahimi, O, O’Boyle, M P et al (2003) Maturation of granule cell dendrites after mossy
fiber arrival in hippocampal field CA3. Hippocampus 13: 413–427
Kaplan, M S (2001) Environment complexity stimulates visual cortex neurogenesis: death of a
dogma and a research career. Trends Neurosci 24: 617–620
Kaplan, M S and Hinds, J W (1977) Neurogenesis in the adult rat: electron microscopic analysis
of light radioautographs. Science 197: 1092–1094
Kempermann, G (2006) Adult neurogenesis. Oxford University Press, New York
Kempermann, G, Jessberger, S, Steiner, B et al (2004) Milestones of neuronal development in the
adult hippocampus. Trends Neurosci 27: 447–452
Kim, E J, Leung, C T, Reed, R R et  al (2007) In vivo analysis of Ascl1 defined progenitors
reveals distinct developmental dynamics during adult neurogenesis and gliogenesis. J Neurosci
27: 12764–12774
Kim, E J, Battiste, J, Nakagawa, Y et al (2008) Ascl1 (Mash1) lineage cells contribute to discrete
cell populations in CNS architecture. Mol Cell Neurosci 38: 595–606
Kim, J Y, Duan, X, Liu, C Y et al (2009) DISC1 regulates new neuron development in the adult
brain via modulation of AKT-mTOR signaling through KIAA1212. Neuron 63: 761–773
Kolodziej, A, Schulz, S, Guyon, A et al (2008) Tonic activation of CXC chemokine receptor 4 in
immature granule cells supports neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 28:
4488–4500

7  From Embryonic to Adult Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus

213

Kriegstein, A and Alvarez-Buylla, A (2009) The glial nature of embryonic and adult neural stem
cells. Annu Rev Neurosci 32: 149–184
Kriegstein, A R and Noctor, S C (2004) Patterns of neuronal migration in the embryonic cortex.
Trends Neurosci 27: 392–399
Kuhn, H G, Dickinson-Anson, H and Gage, F H (1996) Neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the
adult rat: age-related decrease of neuronal progenitor proliferation. J Neurosci 16: 2027–2033
Lai, K, Kaspar, B K, Gage, F H et  al (2003) Sonic hedgehog regulates adult neural progenitor
proliferation in vitro and in vivo. Nat Neurosci 6: 21–27
Lathia, J D, Rao, M S, Mattson, M P et al (2007) The microenvironment of the embryonic neural
stem cell: lessons from adult niches? Dev Dyn 236: 3267–3282
Laywell, E D, Rakic, P, Kukekov, V G et al (2000) Identification of a multipotent astrocytic stem
cell in the immature and adult mouse brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97: 13883–13888
Lee, S M, Tole, S, Grove, E et al (2000) A local Wnt-3a signal is required for development of the
mammalian hippocampus. Development 127: 457–467
Li, G and Pleasure, S J (2005) Morphogenesis of the dentate gyrus: what we are learning from
mouse mutants. Dev Neurosci 27: 93–99
Li, G and Pleasure, S J (2007) Genetic regulation of dentate gyrus morphogenesis. Prog Brain Res
163: 143–152
Li, G, Kataoka, H, Coughlin, S R et al (2009) Identification of a transient subpial neurogenic zone
in the developing dentate gyrus and its regulation by Cxcl12 and reelin signaling. Development
136: 327–335
Lie, D C, Colamarino, S A, Song, H J et al (2005) Wnt signalling regulates adult hippocampal
neurogenesis. Nature 437: 1370–1375
Liu, M, Pleasure, S J, Collins, A E et al (2000) Loss of BETA2/NeuroD leads to malformation of
the dentate gyrus and epilepsy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97: 865–870
Liu, Y, Namba, T, Liu, J et al (2010) Glial fibrillary acidic protein-expressing neural progenitors
give rise to immature neurons via early intermediate progenitors expressing both glial fibrillary acidic protein and neuronal markers in the adult hippocampus. Neuroscience 166:
241–251
Lu, M, Grove, E A and Miller, R J (2002) Abnormal development of the hippocampal dentate
gyrus in mice lacking the CXCR4 chemokine receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:
7090–7095
Machold, R, Hayashi, S, Rutlin, M et  al (2003) Sonic hedgehog is required for progenitor cell
maintenance in telencephalic stem cell niches. Neuron 39: 937–950
Machon, O, van den Bout, C J, Backman, M et al (2003) Role of beta-catenin in the developing
cortical and hippocampal neuroepithelium. Neuroscience 122: 129–143
Machon, O, Backman, M, Machonova, O et  al (2007) A dynamic gradient of Wnt signaling
controls initiation of neurogenesis in the mammalian cortex and cellular specification in the
hippocampus. Dev Biol 311: 223–237
Madsen, T M, Newton, S S, Eaton, M E et  al (2003) Chronic electroconvulsive seizure upregulates beta-catenin expression in rat hippocampus: role in adult neurogenesis. Biol
Psychiatry 54: 1006–1014
Malatesta, P, Hartfuss, E and Gotz, M (2000) Isolation of radial glial cells by fluorescent-activated
cell sorting reveals a neuronal lineage. Development 127: 5253–5263
Mangale, V S, Hirokawa, K E, Satyaki, P R et al (2008) Lhx2 selector activity specifies cortical
identity and suppresses hippocampal organizer fate. Science 319: 304–309
Marin-Padilla, M (1998) Cajal-Retzius cells and the development of the neocortex. Trends
Neurosci 21: 64–71
Martin, L A, Tan, S S and Goldowitz, D (2002) Clonal architecture of the mouse hippocampus.
J Neurosci 22: 3520–3530
Meyer, K D and Morris, J A (2009) Disc1 regulates granule cell migration in the developing hippocampus. Hum Mol Genet 18: 3286–3297
Miller, F D and Gauthier-Fisher, A (2009) Home at last: neural stem cell niches defined. Cell Stem
Cell 4: 507–510

214

T. Seki

Miller, M W and Nowakowski, R S (1988) Use of bromodeoxyuridine-immunohistochemistry to
examine the proliferation, migration and time of origin of cells in the central nervous system.
Brain Res 457: 44–52
Miyata, T, Maeda, T and Lee, J E (1999) NeuroD is required for differentiation of the granule cells
in the cerebellum and hippocampus. Genes Dev 13: 1647–1652
Miyata, T, Kawaguchi, A, Okano, H et al (2001) Asymmetric inheritance of radial glial fibers by
cortical neurons. Neuron 31: 727–741
Muller, M C, Osswald, M, Tinnes, S et al (2009) Exogenous reelin prevents granule cell dispersion
in experimental epilepsy. Exp Neurol 216: 390–397
Nacher, J, Crespo, C and McEwen, B S (2001) Doublecortin expression in the adult rat telencephalon. Eur J Neurosci 14: 629–644
Nakahira, E and Yuasa, S (2005) Neuronal generation, migration, and differentiation in the mouse
hippocampal primoridium as revealed by enhanced green fluorescent protein gene transfer by
means of in utero electroporation. J Comp Neurol 483: 329–340
Namba, T, Mochizuki, H, Onodera, M et al (2005) The fate of neural progenitor cells expressing astrocytic and radial glial markers in the postnatal rat dentate gyrus. Eur J Neurosci
22: 1928–1941
Namba, T, Namiki, H and Seki, T (2007) Direct evidence for neuronal differentiation of astrocytelike progenitors in the postnatal hippocampus. Neurosci Res 58 Suppl 1: S209
Nelson, W J and Nusse, R (2004) Convergence of Wnt, beta-catenin, and cadherin pathways.
Science 303: 1483–1487
Noctor, S C, Martinez-Cerdeno, V, Ivic, L et al (2004) Cortical neurons arise in symmetric
and asymmetric division zones and migrate through specific phases. Nat Neurosci 7:
136–144
Noles, S R and Chenn, A (2007) Cadherin inhibition of beta-catenin signaling regulates the
proliferation and differentiation of neural precursor cells. Mol Cell Neurosci 35:
549–558
O’Leary, D D and Sahara, S (2008) Genetic regulation of arealization of the neocortex. Curr Opin
Neurobiol 18: 90–100
O’Leary, D D, Chou, S J and Sahara, S (2007) Area patterning of the mammalian cortex. Neuron
56: 252–269
Oldekamp, J, Kraemer, N, Alvarez-Bolado, G et al (2004) bHLH gene expression in the Emx2deficient dentate gyrus reveals defective granule cells and absence of migrating precursors.
Cereb Cortex 14: 1045–1058
Ozen, I, Galichet, C, Watts, C et  al (2007) Proliferating neuronal progenitors in the postnatal
hippocampus transiently express the proneural gene Ngn2. Eur J Neurosci 25: 2591–2603
Palmer, T D, Willhoite, A R and Gage, F H (2000) Vascular niche for adult hippocampal neurogenesis. J Comp Neurol 425: 479–494
Pellegrini, M, Mansouri, A, Simeone, A et  al (1996) Dentate gyrus formation requires Emx2.
Development 122: 3893–3898
Rakic, P (1971) Guidance of neurons migrating to the fetal monkey neocortex. Brain Res 33: 471–476
Rakic, P (2003) Developmental and evolutionary adaptations of cortical radial glia. Cereb Cortex
13: 541–549
Rakic, P (2007) The radial edifice of cortical architecture: from neuronal silhouettes to genetic
engineering. Brain Res Rev 55: 204–219
Ribak, C E, Korn, M J, Shan, Z et al (2004) Dendritic growth cones and recurrent basal dendrites
are typical features of newly generated dentate granule cells in the adult hippocampus. Brain
Res 1000: 195–199
Rickmann, M, Amaral, D G and Cowan, W M (1987) Organization of radial glial cells during the
development of the rat dentate gyrus. J Comp Neurol 264: 449–479
Riquelme, P A, Drapeau, E and Doetsch, F (2008) Brain micro-ecologies: neural stem cell niches
in the adult mammalian brain. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 363: 123–137
Roelink, H (2000) Hippocampus formation: an intriguing collaboration. Curr Biol 10:
R279–R281

7  From Embryonic to Adult Neurogenesis in the Dentate Gyrus

215

Rousselot, P, Lois, C and Alvarez-Buylla, A D (1995) Embryonic (PSA) N-CAM reveals chains
of migrating neuroblasts between the lateral ventricle and the olfactory bulb of adult mice.
J Comp Neurol 351: 51–61
Salama-Cohen, P, Arevalo, M A, Grantyn, R et al (2006) Notch and NGF/p75NTR control dendrite morphology and the balance of excitatory/inhibitory synaptic input to hippocampal
neurones through Neurogenin 3. J Neurochem 97: 1269–1278
Schlessinger, A R, Cowan, W M and Gottlieb, D I (1975) An autoradiographic study of the time
of origin and the pattern of granule cell migration in the dentate gyrus of the rat. J Comp
Neurol 159: 149–175
Schwab, M H, Bartholomae, A, Heimrich, B et al (2000) Neuronal basic helix-loop-helix proteins
(NEX and BETA2/Neuro D) regulate terminal granule cell differentiation in the hippocampus.
J Neurosci 20: 3714–3724
Schwartz, M L, Rakic, P and Goldman-Rakic, P S (1991) Early phenotype expression of cortical
neurons: evidence that a subclass of migrating neurons have callosal axons. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 88: 1354–1358
Seki, T (2002) Hippocampal adult neurogenesis occurs in a microenvironment provided by PSANCAM-expressing immature neurons. J Neurosci Res 69: 772–783
Seki, T (2003) Microenvironmental elements supporting adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Anat
Sci Int 78: 69–78
Seki, T and Arai, Y (1991) The persistent expression of a highly polysialylated NCAM in the
dentate gyrus of the adult rat. Neurosci Res 12: 503–513
Seki, T and Arai, Y (1993a) Distribution and possible roles of the highly polysialylated neural cell
adhesion molecule (NCAM-H) in the developing and adult central nervous system. Neurosci
Res 17: 265–290
Seki, T and Arai, Y (1993b) Highly polysialylated neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM-H) is
expressed by newly generated granule cells in the dentate gyrus of the adult rat. J Neurosci 13:
2351–2358
Seki, T and Arai, Y (1995) Age-related production of new granule cells in the adult dentate gyrus.
Neuroreport 6: 2479–2482
Seki, T and Arai, Y (1999) Temporal and spacial relationships between PSA-NCAM-expressing,
newly generated granule cells, and radial glia-like cells in the adult dentate gyrus. J Comp
Neurol 410: 503–513
Seki, T, Namba, T, Mochizuki, H et  al (2007) Clustering, migration, and neurite formation of
neural precursor cells in the adult rat hippocampus. J Comp Neurol 502: 275–290
Seki, T, Namba, T, Liu, Y et al (2009) How do GFAP-expressing neural progenitors divide and
generate neuron-committed progeny in the postnatal hippocampus? Neuroscience Meeting
Planner. Chicago, IL: Society for Neuroscience Program No. 506.14
Seress, L and Mrzljak, L (1987) Basal dendrites of granule cells are normal features of the fetal and adult
dentate gyrus of both monkey and human hippocampal formations. Brain Res 405: 169–174
Seri, B, Garcia-Verdugo, J M, McEwen, B S et al (2001) Astrocytes give rise to new neurons in
the adult mammalian hippocampus. J Neurosci 21: 7153–7160
Seri, B, Garcia-Verdugo, J M, Collado-Morente, L et al (2004) Cell types, lineage, and architecture of the germinal zone in the adult dentate gyrus. J Comp Neurol 478: 359–378
Shapiro, L A and Ribak, C E (2005) Integration of newly born dentate granule cells into adult
brains: hypotheses based on normal and epileptic rodents. Brain Res Brain Res Rev 48: 43–56
Shapiro, L A, Korn, M J, Shan, Z et al (2005) GFAP-expressing radial glia-like cell bodies are
involved in a one-to-one relationship with doublecortin-immunolabeled newborn neurons in
the adult dentate gyrus. Brain Res 1040: 81–91
Shihabuddin, L S, Horner, P J, Ray, J et al (2000) Adult spinal cord stem cells generate neurons
after transplantation in the adult dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 20: 8727–8735
Shimogori, T, VanSant, J, Paik, E et al (2004) Members of the Wnt, Fz, and Frp gene families
expressed in postnatal mouse cerebral cortex. J Comp Neurol 473: 496–510
Shinozaki, K, Yoshida, M, Nakamura, M et al (2004) Emx1 and Emx2 cooperate in initial phase
of archipallium development. Mech Dev 121: 475–489

216

T. Seki

Sibbe, M, Forster, E, Basak, O et al (2009) Reelin and Notch1 cooperate in the development of
the dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 29: 8578–8585
Sievers, J, Hartmann, D, Pehlemann, F W et  al (1992) Development of astroglial cells in the
proliferative matrices, the granule cell layer, and the hippocampal fissure of the hamster
dentate gyrus. J Comp Neurol 320: 1–32
Solberg, N, Machon, O and Krauss, S (2008) Effect of canonical Wnt inhibition in the neurogenic
cortex, hippocampus, and premigratory dentate gyrus progenitor pool. Dev Dyn 237: 1799–1811
Song, H, Stevens, C F and Gage, F H (2002) Astroglia induce neurogenesis from adult neural stem
cells. Nature 417: 39–44
Spigelman, I, Yan, X X, Obenaus, A et al (1998) Dentate granule cells form novel basal dendrites
in a rat model of temporal lobe epilepsy. Neuroscience 86: 109–120
Steiner, B, Kronenberg, G, Jessberger, S et al (2004) Differential regulation of gliogenesis in the
context of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in mice. Glia 46: 41–52
Steiner, B, Klempin, F, Wang, L et  al (2006) Type-2 cells as link between glial and neuronal
lineage in adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Glia 54: 805–814
Stensaas, L J (1967) The development of hippocampal and dorsolateral pallial region of the cerebral hemisphere in fetal rabbits. V. Sixty millimeter stage, glial cell morphology. J Comp
Neurol 131: 423–436
Subramanian, L and Tole, S (2009) Mechanisms underlying the specification, positional regulation, and function of the cortical hem. Cereb Cortex 19 Suppl 1: i90–i95
Subramanian, L, Remedios, R, Shetty, A et al (2009) Signals from the edges: the cortical hem and
antihem in telencephalic development. Semin Cell Dev Biol 20: 712–718
Suh, H, Deng, W and Gage, F H (2009) Signaling in adult neurogenesis. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol
25: 253–275
Suhonen, J O, Peterson, D A, Ray, J et al (1996) Differentiation of adult hippocampus-derived
progenitors into olfactory neurons in vivo. Nature 383: 624–627
Suzuki, R, Watanabe, J, Arata, S et al (2003) A transgenic mouse model for the detailed morphological study of astrocytes. Neurosci Res 47: 451–454
Tabata, H and Nakajima, K (2003) Multipolar migration: the third mode of radial neuronal migration in the developing cerebral cortex. J Neurosci 23: 9996–10001
Tamamaki, N, Nakamura, K, Okamoto, K et al (2001) Radial glia is a progenitor of neocortical
neurons in the developing cerebral cortex. Neurosci Res 41: 51–60
Theil, T, Aydin, S, Koch, S et al (2002) Wnt and Bmp signalling cooperatively regulate graded
Emx2 expression in the dorsal telencephalon. Development 129: 3045–3054
Tozuka, Y, Fukuda, S, Namba, T et al (2005) GABAergic excitation promotes neuronal differentiation in adult hippocampal progenitor cells. Neuron 47: 803–815
van Praag, H, Schinder, A F, Christie, B R et  al (2002) Functional neurogenesis in the adult
hippocampus. Nature 415: 1030–1034
Verkhusha, V V, Kuznetsova, I M, Stepanenko, O V et  al (2003) High stability of Discosoma
DsRed as compared to Aequorea EGFP. Biochemistry 42: 7879–7884
Yamaguchi, M, Saito, H, Suzuki, M et  al (2000) Visualization of neurogenesis in the central
nervous system using nestin promoter-GFP transgenic mice [In Process Citation]. Neuroreport
11: 1991–1996
Yoshida, M, Suda, Y, Matsuo, I et al (1997) Emx1 and Emx2 functions in development of dorsal
telencephalon. Development 124: 101–111
Yuasa, S (2001) Development of astrocytes in the mouse hippocampus as tracked by tenascin-C
gene expression. Arch Histol Cytol 64: 149–158
Zhao, C (2007) Retrovirus-mediated cell labeling. In: Gage, F. H. et al. (eds.), Adult neurogenesis.
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New York
Zhao, T, Kraemer, N, Oldekamp, J et  al (2006) Emx2 in the developing hippocampal fissure
region. Eur J Neurosci 23: 2895–2907
Zhou, C J, Zhao, C and Pleasure, S J (2004) Wnt signaling mutants have decreased dentate granule
cell production and radial glial scaffolding abnormalities. J Neurosci 24: 121–126

Chapter 8

Activity-Dependent Regulation of the Early
Phase of Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis
Tatsuhiro Hisatsune, Yoko Ide, and Rokuya Nochi

Abstract  New neurons are generated from neural stem cells through the neuronal
progenitor cell stage at the dentate gyrus of the hippocampal formation throughout
life, and contribute to higher cognitive function, such as learning and memory.
Physiological conditions, such as voluntary exercise or enriched environment, or
pathophysiological conditions, such as stroke or epilepsy, upregulate the generation
of new neurons, but the mechanism for governing the promotion of adult neurogenesis has not been fully clarified. It has been widely accepted that the neural
activities of the hippocampal circuitry regulate the generation of hippocampal
new neurons. Actually, a number of neurotransmitter systems – serotoninergic,
GABAergic, cholinergic, purinergic, and glutamatergic systems – are involved in
the regulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis process. In this chapter, we propose
a possible involvement of activity-dependent regulation of the fate of neural stem/
progenitor cells in enhanced hippocampal neurogenesis. In a series of studies, we
and others have reported how hippocampal activity affects the generation of new
neurons, even at the early phase of adult hippocampal neurogenesis. These findings
may also contribute to the pharmaceutical enhancement of adult neurogenesis for
treating neurodegenerative and psychological disorders.

8.1 Overview
New neurons are continuously generated in the hippocampal circuit throughout life
(Altman and Das, 1965, 1967; Kaplan and Hinds, 1977; Kaplan and Bell, 1984;
Gould et al., 1998; Eriksson et al., 1998; Kornack and Rakic, 1999), integrated into
hippocampal circuit (van Praag et  al., 2002; Toni et  al., 2007), and contribute to
cognitive functions of nervous system, such as learning and memory (Shors et al.,
2001; Saxe et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2008; Dupret et al., 2008).

T. Hisatsune (*), Y. Ide, and R. Nochi
Department of Integrated Biosciences, The University of Tokyo,
Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8562, Japan
e-mail: hisatsune@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp
T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_8, © Springer 2011

217

218

T. Hisatsune et al.

At the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus, new neurons develop from the
neural stem cell through the neuronal progenitor cell stage (Seri et  al., 2001;
Fukuda et al., 2003; Filippov et al., 2003; Kempermann et al., 2004). A number of
physiological and pathological conditions, including voluntary exercise (van Praag
et al., 1999; Fabel et al., 2003; Pereira et al., 2007) and ischemic stroke (Jin et al.,
2001; Yoshimura et al., 2001; Tonchev et al., 2003; Koketsu et al., 2006), upregulate the generation of new neurons. Although the mechanism for governing the
promotion of adult neurogenesis has not yet been clarified, the notion that enhanced
neurogenesis is mediated through the regulation of the process of neurogenesis by
neural activity is widely accepted (Cameron et al., 1995; Deisseroth et al., 2004;
Tozuka et al., 2005; Bruel-Jungerman et al., 2006; Chun et al., 2006).
In this chapter, we focus on how activity controls the process of adult neurogenesis from neural stem cells, to neuronal progenitor cells, to early postmitotic immature new neurons. Actually, a number of neurotransmitter systems, g-aminobutyric
acid (GABA)-ergic (Tozuka et al., 2005; Ge et al., 2006), serotoninergic (Santarelli
et  al., 2003), cholinergic (Mohapel et  al., 2005; Kaneko et  al., 2006; Itou et al.,
2011), and glutamatergic (Cameron et al., 1995), are involved in the regulation
of the early phase of adult hippocampal neurogenesis. These findings may also
contribute to the pharmaceutical enhancement of adult neurogenesis for treating
neurodegenerative and psychological disorders.

8.2 Hippocampal Circuits in the Dentate Gyrus
The dentate gyrus is a hippocampal region where new neurons are continuously
generated from neural stem cells. After neuronal maturation, new neurons are integrated as young granule cells at the granular layer of the dentate gyrus. As tri-synaptic
transmissions in the hippocampal circuit, granule cells receive inputs from the entorhinal cortex as the perforant pathway, and extend axonal projections as mossy fibers
toward the CA3 pyramidal neurons (Fig. 8.1). CA3 pyramidal neurons extend axonal
projections as Shaffer collateral toward the CA1 pyramidal neurons. Then, CA1
pyramidal neurons send a neural signal back to neurons at the entorhinal cortex. At
the dentate gyrus, both the excitatory interneurons (mossy cells) and the inhibitory
interneurons (for example, basket cells) are interconnected with the tri-synaptic
hippocampal network, and these interneurons may have direct interactions with
neural stem cells and neuronal progenitor cells.
Mossy cells receive inputs basically from mossy fibers of granule cells. Some
mossy cells extend their dendrites toward the outer molecular layer and may receive
inputs from the entorhinal cortex via the perforant pathway. Mossy cells extend
their axons widely to the inner molecular layer of the dentate gyrus even toward the
contralateral side of the hippocampus, in addition to the ipsilateral side. As neural
stem cells extend their cellular processes toward the inner molecular layers, therefore, it would be highly likely that neural stem cells could contact with the axonal
fiber from mossy cells as a source for the glutamatergic neurotransmitter system.

8  Activity-Dependent Regulation of the Early Phase of Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis 219

Fig. 8.1  The hippocampal circuit comprises tri-synaptic transmissions in the dentate gyrus (DG),
CA3, and CA1 regions. In addition to the feed-forward tri-synaptic pathway, there might be a
feedback pathway from CA3 to mossy cells

In the dentate gyrus, at least six types of GABAergic interneurons are involved:
axo-axonic cells, basket 1 cells, basket 2 cells, hilar commissural-associational
pathway-related (HICAP) cells, hilar perforant path-associated (HIPP) cells, and
molecular layer perforant path-associated (MOPP) cells contribute to the neural
activity in the dentate gyrus (Freund and Buzsáki, 1996). In detail, axo-axonic cells
and basket 1 cells, which are parvalbumin (PV) positive, locate in all layers of the
dentate gyrus, and innervate both granule cell layer and hilus. Basket 2 cells, which
are cholecystokinin (CCK) positive, locate within or just below the granule cell
layer bordering the hilus and are involved in local circuits. They receive inputs from
both the perforant path and from the local mossy fiber collaterals, whereas their
axons form synapses with granule cells in the granule cell layer. HICAP cells
receive both symmetrical and asymmetrical synapses from all layers, and their
axons mainly spread just above the granular layer. Therefore, they are thought to be
involved in both feed-forward and feed-back circuits. HIPP cells have dendritic
trees limited to the hilus that perfectly coincide with mossy fiber collaterals and
extend axons to the outer two-thirds of the molecular layer. Thus, HIPP cells may
mediate feedback inhibition of granule cells. Finally, MOPP cells make axonal and
dendritic trees only to the outer two-thirds of the dentate molecular layer, although
they span widely in transverse length. This interneuron type is likely to be driven
in a feed-forward manner, largely by entorhinal afferents. In a previous study, we
found that neuronal progenitor cells have direct neural inputs from a hippocampal
GABAergic network (Tozuka et al., 2005).

220

T. Hisatsune et al.

8.3 Extrinsic Inputs to Hippocampal Circuits
Hippocampal formation basically interacts with other regions of brain areas via the
two major gateway systems: the entorhinal cortex and the fimbria-fornix pathway.
As already described, the perforant pathway from the entorhinal cortex is the major
input gateway for hippocampal formation (Amaral and Lavenex, 2007). From layer
2, entorhinal projection neurons extend their axons toward both the dentate gyrus
and the CA3 areas. From layer 3, entorhinal projection neurons extend their axons
toward the CA1 areas. Afferents (inputs) to the entorhinal cortex include the association cortex of the cingulate gyrus, the temporal cortex, the orbital cortex, and the
amygdala. Therefore, the neural activities at these association cortices may affect
the process of hippocampal neurogenesis through the entorhinal cortex-perforant
pathway system.
Through the fimbria-fornix pathway, the hippocampal formation including the
dentate gyrus receives direct inputs from the septum (medial septal nucleus and
the nucleus of the diagonal band of Broca) (Amaral and Lavenex, 2007). From
the septum, both cholinergic fibers and GABAergic fibers penetrate toward the
granule cell layers. Therefore, it would be highly likely that the neural activities
of the septum may involve the regulation of hippocampal neurogenesis through the
direct influences against neural stem cells or neuronal progenitor cells. The fimbriafornix pathway also sends the glutamatergic inputs to hippocampal formations from
the contralateral hippocampus and the hypothalamus (the supramammillary area),
as another glutamatergic input other than the entorhinal cortex-perforant pathway
system. These excitatory inputs perhaps reach the subgranular zone of the dentate
gyrus, directly or indirectly, where both neural stem cells and neuronal progenitor
cells reside.
In addition, the hippocampal formation receives monoaminergic ascending pathways (serotoninergic and noradrenergic) (Amaral and Lavenex, 2007). The penetrations of both serotoninergic and noradrenergic fibers are observed at the subgranular
zone of the dentate gyrus. Santarelli et  al. (2003) have elegantly demonstrated
that these monoaminergic systems affect the process of hippocampal neurogenesis.

8.4 Theta-Rhythm as a Typical Hippocampal Circuit Activity
In the hippocampus of freely moving rodents, six prominent EEG patterns have
been identified: four rhythmical and two nonrhythmical (O’Keefe, 2007).
Rhythmical patterns include theta (4–12 Hz), beta (12–30 Hz), gamma (30–100 Hz),
and ripple (100–400  Hz) waves. Nonrhythmical patterns include large irregular
amplitude activity (LIA) and small irregular amplitude activity (SIA). Some
patterns can co-occur (e.g., theta with gamma, LIA with ripples), whereas others
appear to be mutually exclusive (e.g., theta, LIA, and SIA). The latter three

8  Activity-Dependent Regulation of the Early Phase of Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis 221

waveforms appear to correspond to mutually exclusive states of hippocampal
functioning. Hippocampal EEG activities in the theta range are described next in
detail. LIA with ripples occur during quiet sitting and slow-wave sleep, sometimes
in a slow rhythm (delta range at 0.5–4 Hz). SIA is a very low amplitude pattern and
occurs only occasionally.
Theta-rhythm (also called theta oscillations) is a typical EEG activity in the
hippocampal circuit. It consists of theta waves in combination with gamma spikes.
Although theta-rhythm was initially observed by Jung and Kornmullar (1938), its
function has remained undefined. Theta-rhythm may represent a hippocampal
arousal pattern (Green and Arduini, 1954; Vanderwolf, 1969; Bland, 1986), which
could be related to learning and memory (Kahana et  al., 1999; Cornwell et  al.,
2008). Actually, the hippocampal region is critically involved in memory, as
revealed in both animal and human studies. In addition to learning and memory,
elevation of theta-rhythm is observed during voluntary exercise, such as running,
walking, jumping, and swimming (Vanderwolf, 1969).
Theta-rhythm are often classified into two subtypes on the basis of behavioral
correlation and pharmacological sensitivity. One is a-theta or type 2 theta (for
arousal/attention theta; 4–8 Hz), which is sensitive to anticholinergic drugs such
as atropine, and the other is t-theta or type 1 theta (intention to move, for translation
movement theta; 8–12  Hz), which may be also dependent on serotoninergic.
Theta-rhythm in hippocampal circuit is mediated by several types of neurons
(Fig.  8.2). At the dentate gyrus, both projection neurons of granule cells and
interneurons (excitatory mossy cells and inhibitory basket cells) are involved in the
theta circuit. These cells receive neural inputs from layer 2 of the entorhinal cortex,
medial septum (MS), and feedback projections from CA3 pyramidal neurons. Thetarhythm runs through the tri-synaptic hippocampal circuit from the dentate
gyrus → CA3 → CA1, then back to the entorhinal cortex (Buzsáki, 2002, 2006).
Theta-rhythm is a synchronized neural firing of these neurons in the hippocampus.
Lesions of the medial septal nucleus eliminate both types of theta activity.
Inactivation by intraseptal injections of the local anesthetic procaine or GABAergic
drug muscimol eliminates all theta from the hippocampus. Intraseptal injection of
cholinergic antagonists (such as atropine) also blocks both thetas if the animal sits
quietly, but leaves movement-related t-theta intact (Lawson and Bland, 1993).
In contrast, lesions of the entorhinal cortex eliminate t-theta but leave a-theta intact
(Kramis et al., 1975). These results suggest two pacemakers for theta generation:
septum and entorhinal cortex.
For considering theta-rhythm as the driving force for the promotion of adult
neurogenesis as a physiological elevation of hippocampal network activity, we shall
take the two types of theta-rhythm into account. Type 1 theta from the entorhinal
cortex occurs during voluntary movements whereas type 2 theta from the septum
occurs for arousal/attention. For the direct activation of neural stem cells and/or
neuronal progenitor cells by type 1 or type 2 theta-rhythm, it is possible to selectively deliver electrical stimulation at the perforant pathway or fimbria-fornix
pathway, respectively.

222

T. Hisatsune et al.

Fig.  8.2  The hippocampal circuit mediates theta-rhythm. Theta-rhythm is regulated by several
types of neurons, such as basket cells, granule cells, mossy cells, CA3 pyramidal cells, and CA1
pyramidal cells. These cells receive neural inputs from the entorhinal cortex (layers 2 and 3) and
the medial septum (MS). Theta-rhythm is induced by synchronized neural firing of these neurons
in the hippocampus

8.5 Process of Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis
In the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, new neurons are generated from neural
stem cells through neuronal progenitor cells. Although the nomenclature of these
precursor cells is still relatively complicated, in this chapter we simply use the two
terms neural stem cells and neuronal progenitor cells (Fig. 8.3). After the terminal
differentiation, postmitotic new neurons survive and become granule cells with
12 weeks of neuronal maturation (van Praag et al., 2002). Each differentiation step
is strictly regulated by genetic mechanisms (for review, see Abrous et al., 2005), as
is fully explained by other chapter of this book (for example; Chaps. 7).
Neural stem cells reside at the subgranular zone of dentate gyrus. In fresh hippocampal slices from nestin-promoter-GFP (NestinP-GFP) transgenic mice
(Yamaguchi et  al., 2000), we visualize both neural stem cells and neuronal
progenitor cells (Fukuda et  al., 2003). By means of patch-clamp recordings, we
observed many glial characteristics in neural stem cells. The notable membrane
property of neural stem cells is their low input resistance (IR) value (<500  MW;

8  Activity-Dependent Regulation of the Early Phase of Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis 223

Fig. 8.3  Process of adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Neural stem cells give rise to mature new
neurons through the neuronal progenitor cell stage. The value of the input resistance, one of the
membrane properties, clearly differentiates neural stem cells from neuronal progenitor cells

Fig. 8.4). From this value, we clearly discriminate between neural stem cells and
neuronal progenitor cells because neuronal progenitor cells have a higher IR value
(>500 MW). In addition, we did not detect any inward currents through the voltagegated Na channel in neural stem cells. By immunohistochemical staining, we
detected numbers of glial proteins such as glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP) and
glutamate aspartate transporter (GLAST) in neural stem cells.
Morphologically, neural stem cells could be further differentiated into the two
subtypes. Radial glia-like neural stem cells have thick radial processes toward the
molecular layer of the dentate gyrus and behave as quiescent stem cells. We seldom
observe the division of radial glia-like stem cells; therefore, dividing stem cells may
not possess the thick radial process. After careful confocal observation, however,
we can still trace the thin process from these round-type stem cells. We also detect
GFAP expression at the initial segment of the proximal process. In the developing
nervous system, most of the dividing stem cells manifest such morphology and
extend their fine processes toward the pial surface area. Gage and colleagues named
quiescent stem cells and dividing stem cells, respectively, by using the Sox2promoter driven GFP mouse (Suh et al., 2007). Kempermann and colleagues have
pointed out that the expression of Sox2 is limited to type 1 and type 2a cells.
Recently, they realized the type2a cell is a type of glial cell (Steiner et al., 2006).
In our previous publication, we had called neural stem cells (with glial phenotype)

224

T. Hisatsune et al.

Fig. 8.4  Bimodal distribution
of the input resistance in
NestinP-GFP-positive precursor cells, for the clear discrimination between neural
stem cells and neuronal progenitor cells in the adult dentate gyrus. (a) Relationship
between input resistance (IR)
and resting membrane potential (RMP). Abscissa, IR in
logarithmic scale; ordinate,
RMP. Plot of results from a
total of 74 green fluorescent
protein (GFP)-positive cells.
(b) Distribution of IR of GFPpositive cells. Ordinate, number of cells; abscissa, IR
[same as (a)]. The curve indicates the result of a nonlinear,
least squares curve fitting of a
double Gaussian distribution.
The vertical broken line indicates the trough between two
Gaussian peaks at ~500 MW.
(For more details, see Fukuda
et al., 2003)

a type I cell. Because of this confusion, in this chapter, we propose simply calling
quiescent stem cells and dividing stem cells (Gage’s nomenclature), type 1 and type
2a cells (Kempermann’s nomenclature), B cells (Arturo Alvarez-Buylla’s nomenclature), and type I cells (our initial nomenclature) as neural stem cells.
The next step of differentiation toward new neurons is neuronal progenitor cells.
These progenitor cells still divide, and begin to possess several characteristics:
physiologically, they have high IR (>500 MW) and immunohistochemically, GFAP
expression is downregulated, and the processes toward the granule cell layer
disappear. Kempermann and colleagues have termed these neuronal progenitor
cells in the course of the neuronal differentiation process as type 2b and type 3 cells.
The discrimination between type 2b and type 3 is the detection of nestin-promoterdriven GFP molecules. We detect the expression of GFP molecules in type 2b cells
but not in type 3 cells. The fine subclassification of differentiating cells sometimes
contributes to understanding the molecular mechanism for neuronal differentiation
but simultaneously leads to too much information, especially for readers unfamiliar

8  Activity-Dependent Regulation of the Early Phase of Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis 225

with this particular area. Therefore, to simplify, We propose calling type 2b and
type 3 after Kempermann’s nomenclature, D cells (after Arturo Alvarez-Buylla),
and type II cells (our initial nomenclature) as neuronal progenitor cells.

8.6 Activity-Dependent Regulation of Adult Neurogenesis
A number of physiological environments and situations regulate the genesis of
adult-born neurons. Among them, enriched environments and physical exercise are
two popular stimuli that promote adult neurogenesis. In 1997, Kempermann et al.
reported that exposure to an enriched environment has a survival-promoting effect
on newly generated cells in the adult dentate gyrus (Kempermann et  al., 1997),
whereas physical activity may induce precursor cell proliferation (van Praag et al.,
1999; Suh et al., 2007). A comparison of different strains of mice showed that an
enriched environment affects hippocampal neurogenesis differently according to
the genetic background. In C57BL/6 mice that have a high baseline level of neurogenesis, environmental enrichment increases cell survival but not cell proliferation,
whereas in 129/SvJ mice, which have low levels of neurogenesis, it also increases
cell proliferation (Kempermann et al., 1997, 1998).
Physical stimuli, including voluntary exercise, motivated behavior, novelty
environments, exploratory behavior, and learning, enhance the rate of hippocampal
neurogenesis. This spectrum of behavior is related to the elevation of theta-rhythm
activities in hippocampal circuits. Therefore, the theta-rhythm would be the direct
force to drive activation of neural stem cells and/or neuronal progenitor cells,
which give rise to adult-born neurons.
In addition to physiological stimuli, several pathophysiological conditions, such as
epilepsy or ischemic stroke, also promote the process of hippocampal neurogenesis
(Abrous et al., 2005). In terms of hippocampal EEG, these pathological conditions also
elevate the level of hippocampal theta-band activities. Thus, elevation of the thetarhythm would be a general mechanism for activating hippocampal neurogenesis.
On the other hand, several physiological and pathological conditions suppress the
genesis of new neurons: psychological stress, sleep deprivation, Alzheimer’s disease,
and aging (Abrous et al., 2005). The mechanism for the attenuation of neurogenesis
remains to be elucidated. The modulation of hippocampal EEG activities may be
involved in the downregulation of neurogenesis in these conditions.
As mentioned before, type 2 theta (a-theta) activity is from the septum and is
mediated by both cholinergic and GABAergic transmission. These fibers directly
penetrate into the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus. In this area, cholinergic
fibers basically form synapses onto GABAergic interneurons (basket cells) and
hilar excitatory interneurons (mossy cells). Physical activity-related theta (type 1
theta or t-theta) is mediated through the perforant pathway from the entorhinal
cortex. Because the entorhinal cortex is a main gate from most of the cortical areas
toward the hippocampal circuit, type 1 theta therefore could be modulated by sensory inputs and the intention of movement.

226

T. Hisatsune et al.

In combination with the theta-rhythm circuit, catecholaminergic (serotoninergic,
noradrenergic, and dopaminergic) systems may modulate the rate of neurogenesis.
Both noradrenergic and serotoninergic fibers penetrate directly toward the neurogenic area; thus, it is possible to speculate on the influence of these systems on
activity at the dentate gyrus. Very recently, Airan et  al. have suggested that the
serotoninergic system may upregulate the power of EEG activities at the dentate
gyrus (Airan et  al., 2007). Taken together, type 2 theta would be dependent on
serotoninergic neurotransmission, and neurogenesis enhanced by treatment with
serotonin-specific reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) (Santarelli et al., 2003) might be the
result of upregulation of hippocampal EEG activities. If the doperminergic system
would also modulate neurogenesis, this effect could be caused by an indirect effect
through the modification of function of septal neurons, where we observed the
robust enervation of dopaminergic fibers.

8.7 Neural Inputs and Regulations on Neural Stem Cells
Neural stem cells residing within the subgranular zone in the adult dentate gyrus
are the source of new neurons because they give rise to neuronal progenitor cells,
which finally differentiate to mature new neurons (Fukuda et al., 2003; Kempermann
et  al., 2004). The neural stem cells include the radial glia-like cells with GFAPpositive long processes (type 1) and weakly GFAP-expressing progenitor cells with
short and thin processes (type 2a) (Itou et  al., 2011). Neural stem cells have the
ability for both self-renewal and generation of progenitor cells by symmetrical and
asymmetrical division.
In the adult dentate gyrus, neural stem cells are clearly identified by using the
NestinP-GFP transgenic mouse (Yamaguchi et  al., 2000), in which enhanced EGF
(EGFP) is driven by nestin second intron enhancers. Neural stem (type 1 and 2a) cells
have characteristic electrophysiological properties: they have a small IR (<500 MΩ)
whereas type 2b cells present a larger IR (>500 MΩ) (Fig. 8.4). This range of neural
stem cells substantially overlaps with that for recordings from the dentate gyrus astrocytes in hippocampal slices of adult rats (mean, 175 MΩ; range, 119–278 MΩ; Bordey
and Sontheimer, 2000), although, in the developmental stage, the IR of glial cells is
relatively high (Kressin et al., 1995; Matthias et al., 2003). Additionally, neural stem
cells were characterized by their properties: the significantly higher resting membrane
potential (RMP) and the lack of voltage-dependent inward currents upon depolarization.
In the adult dentate gyrus, neural stem cells reach their radial processes toward
the molecular layer, where the perforant path from the entorhinal cortex or fibers
from hippocampal mossy cells run through, and their radial processes locate close
to the asymmetrical synapses between the mossy cells and granule cells in the inner
molecular layer. Therefore, neural stem cells are integrated into the hippocampal
local circuit through which theta-rhythm activities run. Interestingly, in the hippo­
campal slice, stimulation of the perforant path with a high theta-burst protocol
induced strong calcium responses in neural stem cells (Fig. 8.5). Therefore, neural

8  Activity-Dependent Regulation of the Early Phase of Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis 227

Fig. 8.5  Theta-burst stimulation activates neural stem cells in a hippocampal slice. A calciumsensitive dye, Fluo-4, was injected through the patch pipette into neural stem cells, which bear the
NestinP-GFP signal. After theta-burst at the perforant pathway, we observed a rapid increase in the
fluorescence signal from fluo-4-loaded neural stem cells. Note that most of calcium was released
from the endoplasmic reticulum around the cell nucleus. (From Nochi et al., unpublished data)

stem cells could be integrated into the hippocampal local circuit and have potential
to receive neural input. Accumulating evidence shows that the hippocampal circuit
activity mediates the proliferation and differentiation rate of neural stem/progenitor
cells (Deisseroth et al., 2004; Tozuka et  al., 2005; Bruel-Jungerman et  al., 2006;

228

T. Hisatsune et al.

Chun et  al., 2006). Theta-rhythm is elevated in several physiological conditions,
such as voluntary exercise and learning. These physical activities also increase the
genesis of new neurons in the adult dentate gyrus. There is an emerging hypothesis
that elevation in the cell division of neural stem cells is the reason for the promotion
of the generation of new neurons by voluntary exercise.
Very recently, we reported that exercise-induced hippocampal neurogenesis is
dependent on septal cholinergic neurons (Itou et al., 2011). After the abrogation of
septal cholinergic neurons by the injection of p75-SAP (Advanced Targeting
Systems), the enhancement effect of wheel running exercise on neural stem cell
proliferation was completely deleted. This effect was also found in aged mice
(>2 years old). In addition, the calcium response of neural stem cells was induced
by the focal application of muscarine in a fresh hippocampal slice. These results
strongly suggest that acetylcholine released during wheel running may activate
muscarinic-ACh receptors on neural stem cells.
The genesis of new neurons gradually decreases during the aging process
(Hattiangady and Shetty, 2008); however, neural stem cells maintain their numbers
in the adult dentate gyrus throughout the life, even in the aged. Our recent study
using aged nonhuman primates (Macaca fascicularis >20 years old; Aizawa et al.,
2011) also supports the notion that the number of neural stem cells is not decreased
substantially in aged animals. Therefore, the reason for the decrease of adult
neurogenesis is the change of proliferating activity of neural stem cells in aged
animals. Very interestingly, the administration of the acetylcholinesterase (AChE)
inhibitor donepezil promotes the proliferation of neural stem cells in aged animals
(Itou et  al., 2011). In aged animals, voluntary exercise or cholinergic activation
promotes the generation of adult hippocampal new neurons.

8.8 Neural Inputs and Regulations on Neuronal
Progenitor Cells
As mentioned previously, neural progenitor cells can be sorted into type 2b and
type 3 cells. Both type 2b and type 3 cells transiently amplify with higher proliferative activity compared with neural stem cells (type 1 and type 2a) (Fukuda et al.,
2003), but exit the cell cycle within 1–3 days after several divisions. Type 2b cells
can be identified by their expression of both nestin and polysialated neural cell
adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM) or extremely high IR (>500 MW), whereas type
3 cells are negative with nestin. However, studies to characterize type 3 cells
electrophysiologically are lacking at the present time.
From electron microscopy observation, we identified the synaptic inputs
toward neuronal progenitor cells (Fig. 8.6). Neuronal progenitor cells are D cells
in another nomenclature, which means dense nucleus in electron microscopy.
On the other hand, neural stem cells have a bright nucleus and extend their
processes toward the molecular layer. By GFP-targeted recording, we found
that neuronal progenitor (type 2b) cells receive active direct neural inputs from

Fig.  8.6  Neuronal progenitor cells receive g-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic inputs. (a, b)
Immunoelectron microscopy images of neural stem cells and neuronal progenitor cells (type 2b
cells). GFP was visualized with electron-dense DAB precipitation after anti-GFP staining.
(a) Image showing neural stem cells with thick radial process (type 1 cell). (b) Image showing
neuronal progenitor cells (type 2b cell) with dark nuclei and scant cytoplasm (C). Cell marked
with 1 might be classified into the current nomenclature of type 2a, which has a bright nucleus,
but does not extend a thick radial process. (b¢) Enlarged view of boxed area in (b). A terminal-like
structure apposed to the plasma membrane of a neuronal progenitor cell. 1, neural stem cell (type
1 and type 2a); 2, neuronal progenitor cells (type 2b); G, granule cell. (c–g) Confocal images of
the subgranular zone of adult mice. VGAT (vesicular GABA transporter)-expressing terminallike structures in close contact with neuronal progenitor cell (type 2b cell). (c) Nestin-GFP expression. (d) Polysialated neural cell adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM) staining. (e) VGAT staining.
(f) Merged. (g) Enlarged view of boxed area in (f), focusing on the VGAT+ nerve terminals on
the neuronal progenitor cell (type 2b cell) at high magnification. Note GABAergic terminals
making contact on a neuronal progenitor cell (type 2b cell). Bars (a,b) 4 mm; (b¢) 200 nm;
(f) 5 mm; (g) 1 mm. (For more details, see Tozuka et al., 2005)

230

T. Hisatsune et al.

the hippocampal circuitry (Tozuka et al., 2005): this input was GABAergic but
not glutamatergic. Neuronal progenitor cells that were visualized by NestinP-GFP
and PSA-NCAM staining have GABAergic neural input, which was identified
by the staining of vesicular-type GABA transporters located at the axonal
terminals.
One of the most interesting characteristics of the type 2b cells is the neuronal
differentiation induced by GABAergic input. The systemic injection of GABAergic
agonists caused 50% increase in the number of new neurons (Fig. 8.7; from Tozuka
et al., 2005). Because neuronal progenitor cells (type 2b cells) have high chloride

Fig. 8.7  GABAergic treatment promotes the neuronal
differentiation of neuronal
progenitor (type 2b) cells.
(a) Experimental paradigm
for assessing the neuronal
differentiation of neuronal
progenitor cells (type 2b
cells). (b) Number of bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)labeled calbindin+ cells in
each animal. Note the significant increase of BrdU+ new
neurons in the GABAA-R
agonist-treated groups.
Error bars indicate SEM
*P < 0.05, Student’s t test
for unpaired samples. (For
more details, see Tozuka
et al., 2005)

8  Activity-Dependent Regulation of the Early Phase of Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis 231

content from the expression of Na+-K+-2Cl− transporter (NKCC1), they depolarize
by activation of GABAA receptors (Tozuka et al., 2005). This depolarization elicits
an elevation of intracellular Ca2+ influx through the activation of voltage-gated Ca2+
channels such as the L-type Ca2+ channel. In consequence, expression of NeuroD,
a positive regulator of neuronal differentiation, will be induced by the Ca2+ influx.
The GABAA receptors of type 2b cells can be activated by release of GABA
from hippocampal GABAergic interneurons such as basket cells or axo-axonic
cells (Tozuka et al., 2005; Ge et al., 2006). Several neural pathways are thought to
influence hippocampal GABAergic interneurons. GABAergic interneurons are
widely spread in hippocampus, but those neurons in the hilus receive excitatory
inputs from the entorhinal cortex, which innervate the molecular layer through the
perforant path. GABAergic interneurons in hilus also receive acetylcholinergic
input from the septum, so septal excitation can also affect type 2b cells indirectly.
N-Methyl-d-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor (NMDA-R) blockade in vivo also
robustly increases proliferation of progenitor cells (Cameron et al., 1995; Nacher
et al., 2001). This proliferation might suggest a direct influence of NMDA antagonists on adult progenitor cells; however, by means of targeted recording we have
detected no significant functional expression of NMDA-Rs on either stem cells or
progenitor cells in the adult dentate gyrus (Wang et al., 2005; Tozuka et al., 2005).
It is possible that this phenomenon results from indirect effects mediated via
GABAergic inputs to type 2b cells. GABA release from hippocampal interneurons
requires NMDA-R activation (Matsuyama et al., 1997).

8.9 Neural Inputs and Regulation on Postmitotic
Immature New Neurons
After the final mitosis of neuronal progenitor cells, newborn cells start to mature as
neurons (Zhao et  al., 2006). Control in adult hippocampal neurogenesis is also
prominent at the stage of early postmitotic neurons (before 2 weeks; Gould et al.,
1999; Döbrössy et al., 2003; Dupret et al., 2007). Because glutamatergic inputs are
seen in the new neurons from 2 to 4 weeks after birth, and start to act as mature
granule neurons from 4 weeks, it has been expected that there are other sources of
neural input (GABAergic or cholinergic) toward immature new neurons before
2 weeks after mitosis for the selection of new neurons.
Interestingly, the depolarizing response to GABA input remains until 2 weeks after
birth, for their high chloride content, although it switches to hyperpolarizing response
because the K+-Cl– cotransporter (KCC2) is upregulated and decreases the chloride
concentration (Esposito et al., 2005; Ge et al., 2006). In addition, immature neurons
distinguished by PSA-NCAM may also receive acetylcholinergic inputs (Kaneko
et al., 2006). We also observed both GABAergic and cholinergic inputs to new neurons at least 7 days after mitosis (Ide et al., unpublished observations). To our surprise,
new neurons have already grown their axonal fibers, which is called the “mossy fiber,”

232

T. Hisatsune et al.

Fig.  8.8  Mossy fiber terminals of immature new neuron. New neurons labeled with enhanced
green fluorescent protein (GFP) tagged with the membrane-targeting GAP43 palmitoylation site
(GGFP) form mossy fiber terminals toward CA3 within a week after final mitosis. Both large
bouton (a) and small terminal (b; arrowhead) are innervated to hilus and CA3. (c) GGFP-labeled
large boutons showed asymmetrical synapse with unlabeled spines (uS; arrowhead), and puncta
adherens-like junctions with unlabeled dendritic shaft (uD; arrow). GGFP expression to newborn
cells was designed with adenovirus injection to Nestin-Cre transgenic mouse. Bars (a,b) 5 mm;
(c) 500 nm. (For more details, see Ide et al., 2008)

and form synapses with neurons in the hilus and CA3 areas just 7 days after their final
mitosis (Fig. 8.8; Ide et al., 2008). This finding suggests that new neurons are already
integrated in the hippocampal network within a week after birth. Although 1-week-old
neurons might be still too early to functionally recruit into spatial memory networks
(Kee et al., 2007), it is suggested that 1- to 2-week-old newborn neurons are involved
in particular learning tasks (Shors et al., 2001; Olariu et al., 2005).
Therefore, the survival and the maturation of newborn neurons can be controlled
by many kinds of neural activities, GABAergic and/or cholinergic excitation.
Knockdown of the NKCC1 by short-hairpin RNA reveals that depolarization by
GABAergic input plays a critical role in the development for dendrites and formation of synapses (Ge et al., 2006). In addition, the cholinergic system also supports
the survival of new neurons (Mohapel et  al., 2005; Kaneko et  al., 2006).
Furthermore, it can be assumed that the postsynaptic neurons may deliver some
signals for cell survival or maturation of immature new neurons about 1–2 weeks
after final mitosis. Although glutamatergic inputs to immature neurons are seen
after 2 weeks, earlier integration of immature new neurons before 2 weeks may also
explain why the survival of the new neurons is influenced by experience, such as
spatial or learning memory (Gould et al., 1999; Döbrössy et al., 2003; Tashiro et al.,
2006; Dupret et al., 2007; Kee et al., 2007).

8  Activity-Dependent Regulation of the Early Phase of Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis 233

8.10 Summary and Perspectives
Adult hippocampal neurogenesis provides hope for ameliorating the decline in
cognitive functions in normal aging and mild cognitive impairment in psychological illness, vascular dementia, or Alzheimer’s disease. Hundreds of recent
reports have indicated that many environmental stimuli, such as exercise, exploration, enriched environments, and learning and memory, improve the rate of the
generation of new neurons; however, the mechanism governing the enhanced
neurogenesis has remained elusive. Although endothelial components may be
involved in enhanced neurogenesis, hippocampal circuits would play pivotal roles
in the promotion of adult neurogenesis by environmental stimuli. Other reports
have demonstrated that several pharmaceutical treatments also improve the rate
of neurogenesis at the adult dentate gyrus. It can be reasonably assumed that
hippocampal circuits mediate the effect of these pharmaceutical treatments on
adult hippocampal neurogenesis.
Theta-rhythm is a typical network activity in hippocampal circuits during actively
behaving animals and humans. In addition, the power of theta-rhythm is affected by
the tone of any neurotransmitter systems. Therefore, we could propose that regulation of the genesis of hippocampal new neurons would be mediated by the dynamics
of theta-rhythm in hippocampal circuits, for example, duration and power, which
could be tuned by environmental stimuli or pharmaceutical treatment.
Although from a conventional aspect it had been assumed that theta-rhythm
might affect only mature neurons fully integrated in the hippocampal tri-synaptic
circuitry, in this chapter we have shown evidence that well supports the view that
even dividing precursor cells (neural stem cells and neuronal progenitor cells), as
well as early postmitotic new neurons, can sense the activities of hippocampal
circuits, especially the power of theta-rhythm activity, as regulation of hippocampal
neurogenesis would occur at its early stage, from neural stem cells, to neuronal
progenitor cells, to early postmitotic new neurons (before 3 weeks). These lines of
research may contribute to develop therapeutic interventions for age-related
cognitive decline.
Acknowledgments  We thank Drs. Satoshi Fukuda and Yusuke Tozuka for their discussion,
comments, and the images.

References
Abrous DN, Koehl M, Le Moal M (2005) Adult neurogenesis: from precursors to network and
physiology. Physiol Rev 85:523–569
Airan RD, Meltzer LA, Roy M et al (2007) High-speed imaging reveals neurophysiological links
to behavior in an animal model of depression. Science 317:819–823
Aizawa K, Ageyama N, Terao K, Hisatsune T (2011) Primate-specific alterations in neural stem/
progenitor cells in the aged hippocampus. Neurobiol Aging, doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.
32:140–150 (2011).12.011, online

234

T. Hisatsune et al.

Altman J, Das GD (1965) Autoradiographic and histological evidence of postnatal hippocampal
neurogenesis in rats. J Comp Neurol 124:319–335
Altman J, Das GD (1967) Postnatal neurogenesis in the guinea-pig. Nature 214:1098–1101
Amaral D, Lavenex P (2007) Hippocampal neuroanatomy. In: Anderson P, Morris R, Amaral D, Bliss T,
O’Keefe J (eds) The hippocampus book. Oxford University Press, New York, p 37–114
Bland BH (1986) The physiology and pharmacology of hippocampal formation theta rhythms.
Prog Neurobiol 26:1–54
Bordey A, Sontheimer H (2000) Ion channel expression by astrocytes in situ: comparison of
different CNS regions. Glia 30:27–38
Bruel-Jungerman E, Davis S, Rampon C et al (2006) Long-term potentiation enhances neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 26:5888–5893
Buzsáki G (2002) Theta oscillations in the hippocampus. Neuron 33:325–340
Buzsáki G (2006) Rhythms of the brain. Oxford University Press, New York
Cameron HA, McEwen BS, Gould E (1995) Regulation of adult neurogenesis by excitatory input
and NMDA receptor activation in the dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 15:4687–4692
Chun SK, Sun W, Park, JJ et al (2006) Enhanced proliferation of progenitor cells following longterm potentiation induction in the rat dentate gyrus. Neurobiol Learn Mem 86:322–329
Cornwell BR, Johnson LL, Holroyd T et  al (2008) Human hippocampal and parahippocampal
theta during goal-directed spatial navigation predicts performance on a virtual Morris water
maze. J Neurosci 28:5983–5990
Deisseroth K, Singla S, Toda H et al (2004) Excitation-neurogenesis coupling in adult neural stem/
progenitor cells. Neuron 42:535–552
Döbrössy MD, Drapeau E, Aurousseau C et al (2003) Differential effects of learning on neurogenesis: learning increases or decreases the number of newly born cells depending on their birth
date. Mol Psychiatry 8:974–982
Dupret D, Fabre A, Döbrössy MD et al (2007) Spatial learning depends on both the addition and
removal of new hippocampal neurons. PLoS Biol 5:e214
Dupret D, Revest JM, Koehl M et al (2008) Spatial relational memory requires hippocampal adult
neurogenesis. PLoS One 3:e1959
Eriksson PS, Perfilieva E, Bjork-Eriksson T et  al (1998) Neurogenesis in the adult human
hippocampus. Nat Med 4:1313–1317
Esposito MS, Piatti VC, Laplagne DA et  al (2005) Neuronal differentiation in the adult
hippocampus recapitulates embryonic development. J Neurosci 25:10074–10086
Fabel K, Tam B, Kaufer D et al (2003) VEGF is necessary for exercise-induced adult hippocampal
neurogenesis. Eur J Neurosci 18:2803–2812
Filippov V, Kronenberg G, Pivneva T et al (2003) Subpopulation of nestin-expressing progenitor
cells in the adult murine hippocampus shows electrophysiological and morphological characteristics of astrocytes. Mol Cell Neurosci 23:373–382
Freund TF, Buzsáki G (1996) Interneurons of the hippocampus. Hippocampus 6:347–470
Fukuda S, Kato F, Tozuka Y et al (2003) Two distinct subpopulations of nestin-positive cells in
adult mouse dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 23:9357–9366
Ge S, Goh EL, Sailor KA et al (2006) GABA regulates synaptic integration of newly generated
neurons in the adult brain. Nature 439:589–593
Gould E, Tanapat P, McEwen BS et al (1998) Proliferation of granule cell precursors in the dentate
gyrus of adult monkeys is diminished by stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:3168–3171
Gould E, Beylin A, Tanapat P et al (1999) Learning enhances adult neurogenesis in the hippocampal
formation. Nat Neurosci 2:260–265
Green JD, Arduini A (1954) Hippocampal electrical activity in arousal. J Neurophysiol 17:533–557
Hattiangady B, Shetty AK (2008) Aging does not alter the number or phenotype of putative stem/
progenitor cells in the neurogenic region of the hippocampus. Neurobiol Aging 29:129–147
Ide Y, Fujiyama F, Okamoto-Furuta K, Tamamaki N, Kaneko T, Hisatsune T (2008) Rapid integration of young newborn dentate gyrus granule cells in the adult hippocampal circuitry. Eur
J Neurosci 28:2381–2392
Itou Y, Nochi R, Kuribayashi H, Saito Y, Hisatsune T (2011) Cholinergic activation of hippocampal
neural stem cells in aged dentate gyrus. Hippocampus 21:446–459

8  Activity-Dependent Regulation of the Early Phase of Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis 235
Jin K, Minami M, Lan JQ et al (2001) Neurogenesis in dentate subgranular zone and rostral subventricular zone after focal cerebral ischemia in the rat. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:4710–4715
Jung R, Kornmullar A (1938) Eine methodik der ableitung lokalisierter potential schwankingen
aus subcorticalen hirnyebieten. Arch Psychiat Neruenkr 109:1–30
Kahana MJ, Sekuler R, Caplan JB et al (1999) Human theta oscillations exhibit task dependence
during virtual maze navigation. Nature 24:781–784
Kaneko N, Okano H, Sawamoto K (2006) Role of the cholinergic system in regulating survival of
newborn neurons in the adult mouse dentate gyrus and olfactory bulb. Genes Cells 11:1145–1159
Kaplan MS, Bell DH (1984) Mitotic neuroblasts in the 9-day-old and 11-month-old rodent
hippocampus. J Neurosci 4:1429–1441
Kaplan MS, Hinds JW (1977) Neurogenesis in the adult rat: electron microscopic analysis of light
radioautographs. Science 197:1092–1094
Kee N, Teixeira CM, Wang AH et al (2007) Preferential incorporation of adult-generated granule
cells into spatial memory networks in the dentate gyrus. Nat Neurosci 10:355–362
Kempermann G, Kuhn HG, Gage FH (1997) Genetic influence on neurogenesis in the dentate
gyrus of adult mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:10409–10414
Kempermann G, Brandon EP, Gage FH (1998) Environmental stimulation of 129/SvJ mice
causes increased cell proliferation and neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus. Curr Biol
8:939–942
Kempermann G, Jessberger S, Steiner B et al (2004) Milestones of neuronal development in the
adult hippocampus. Trends Neurosci 27:447–452
Koketsu D, Furuichi Y, Maeda, M et al (2006) Increased number of new neurons in the olfactory
bulb and hippocampus of adult non-human primates after focal ischemia. Exp Neurol
199:92–102
Kornack DR, Rakic P (1999) Continuation of neurogenesis in the hippocampus of the adult
macaque monkey. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:5768–5773
Kramis R, Vanderwolf CH, Bland BH (1975) Two types of hippocampal rhythmical slow activity
in both the rabbit and the rat: relations to behavior and effects of atropine, diethyl ether,
urethane, and pentobarbital. Exp Neurol 49:58–85
Kressin K, Kuprijanova E, Jabs R et al (1995) Developmental regulation of Na+ and K+ conductances in glial cells of mouse hippocampal brain slices. Glia 15:173–187
Lawson VH, Bland BH (1993) The role of the septohippocampal pathway in the regulation of
hippocampal field activity and behavior: analysis by the intraseptal microinfusion of carbachol,
atropine, and procaine. Exp Neurol 120:132–144
Matsuyama S, Nei K, Tanaka C (1997) Regulation of GABA release via NMDA and 5-HT1A
receptors in guinea pig dentate gyrus. Brain Res 761:105–112
Matthias K, Kirchhoff F, Seifert G et al (2003) Segregated expression of AMPA-type glutamate
receptors and glutamate transporters defines distinct astrocyte populations in the mouse hippocampus. J Neurosci 23:1750–1758
Mohapel P, Leanza G, Kokaia M et al (2005) Forebrain acetylcholine regulates adult hippocampal
neurogenesis and learning. Neurobiol Aging 26:939–946
Nacher J, Rosell DR, Alonso-Llosa G et al (2001) NMDA receptor antagonist treatment induces
a long-lasting increase in the number of proliferating cells, PSA-NCAM-immunoreactive
granule neurons and radial glia in the adult rat dentate gyrus. Eur J Neurosci 13:512–520
O’Keefe (2007) Hippocampal neurophysiology in the behaving animal. In: Andersen P, Morris R,
Amaral D, et al (eds) The hippocampus book. Oxford University Press, New York
Olariu A, Cleaver KM, Shore LE et al (2005) A natural form of learning can increase and decrease
the survival of new neurons in the dentate gyrus. Hippocampus 15:750–762
Pereira AC, Huddleston DE, Brickman AM et al (2007) An in vivo correlate of exercise-induced
neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104:5638–5643
Santarelli L, Saxe M, Gross C et  al (2003) Requirement of hippocampal neurogenesis for the
behavioral effects of antidepressants. Science 301:805–809
Saxe MD, Battaglia F, Wang J et al (2006) Ablation of hippocampal neurogenesis impairs contextual fear conditioning and synaptic plasticity in the dentate gyrus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
103:17501–17506

236

T. Hisatsune et al.

Seri B, Garcia-Verdugo JM, McEwen BS et al (2001) Astrocytes give rise to new neurons in the
adult mammalian hippocampus. J Neurosci 21:7153–7160
Shors TJ, Miesegaes G, Beylin A et al (2001) Neurogenesis in the adult is involved in the formation of trace memories. Nature 410:372–376
Steiner B, Klempin F, Wang L et al (2006) Type-2 cells as link between glial and neuronal lineage
in adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Glia 54:805–814
Suh H, Consiglio A, Ray J et  al (2007) In vivo fate analysis reveals the multipotent and selfrenewal capacities of Sox2(+) neural stem cells in the adult hippocampus. Cell Stem Cell
1:515–528
Tashiro A, Sandler VM, Toni N et al (2006) NMDA-receptor-mediated, cell-specific integration
of new neurons in adult dentate gyrus. Nature 442:929–933
Tonchev AB, Yamashima T, Zhao L et al (2003) Proliferation of neural and neuronal progenitors
after global brain ischemia in young adult macaque monkeys. Mol Cell Neurosci 23:292–301
Toni N, Teng EM, Bushong EA et al (2007) Synapse formation on neurons born in the adult
hippocampus. Nat Neurosci 10:727–734
Tozuka Y, Fukuda S, Namba T et al (2005) GABAergic excitation promotes neuronal differentiation in adult hippocampal progenitor cells. Neuron 47:803–815
van Praag H, Kempermann G, Gage FH (1999) Running increases cell proliferation and neurogenesis in the adult mouse dentate gyrus. Nat Neurosci 2:266–270
van Praag H, Schinder AF, Christie BR et  al (2002) Functional neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus. Nature 415:1030–1034
Vanderwolf CH (1969) Hippocampal electrical activity and voluntary movement in the rat.
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 26:407–418
Wang LP, Kempermann G, Kettenmann H (2005) A subpopulation of precursor cells in the mouse
dentate gyrus receives synaptic GABAergic input. Mol Cell Neurosci 29:181–189
Yamaguchi M, Saito H, Suzuki M et al (2000) Visualization of neurogenesis in the central nervous
system using nestin promoter-GFP transgenic mice. Neuroreport 26:1991–1996
Yoshimura S, Takagi Y, Harada J et  al (2001) FGF-2 regulation of neurogenesis in adult hippocampus after brain injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:5874–5879
Zhang CL, Zou Y, He W et al (2008) A role for adult TLX-positive neural stem cells in learning
and behaviour. Nature 451:1004–1007
Zhao C, Teng EM, Summers RG Jr., et al (2006) Distinct morphological stages of dentate granule
neuron maturation in the adult mouse hippocampus. J Neurosci 26:3–11

Chapter 9

Integration of New Neurons into the Adult
Hippocampus
Wei Deng, Chunmei Zhao, and Fred H. Gage

Abstract  The hippocampus is one of the regions where continuous addition of
new neurons occurs in adult mammalian brains. In this review, we describe the
process of integration of newborn neurons into the neural circuitry of the hippocampus in adult rodents and discuss how hippocampal neurogenesis is regulated
by the neural network activity. We further address the functional implications of
adult hippocampal neurogenesis in learning and memory.
Abbreviations
AMPA		
BLBP		
BrdU		
CNS		
Dcx		
DG		
GFAP		
IEGs		
LTP		
MAM		
MWM		
NeuN		
NKCC1		
NMDA		
POMC		
PSA-NCAM	
SGZ		
Tk		

a-Amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid
Brain lipid-binding protein
Bromodeoxyuridine
Central nervous system
Doublecortin
Dentate gyrus
Glial fibrillary acidic protein
Immediate early genes
Long-term potentiation
Methylazoxymethanol acetate
Morris water maze
Neuronal nuclei
Na-K-2Cl cotransporter
N-methyl-d-aspartic acid
Pro-opiomelanocortin
Polysialated form of neural cell adhesion molecule
Subgranular zone
Thymidine kinase

W. Deng, C. Zhao, and F.H. Gage (*)
Laboratory of Genetics, Salk Institute for Biological Studies,
10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
e-mail: gage@salk.edu
T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_9, © Springer 2011

237

238

W. Deng et al.

9.1 Introduction
The hippocampus is one of the brain regions where new neurons are continuously
generated in adult animals, including humans. In the hippocampus, the generation
of new neurons starts with the proliferation of progenitor cells, which are located
in a special region named the subgranular zone (SGZ), lying at the interface
between the granule cell layer and the hilus of the dentate gyrus (DG) (Fig. 9.1a,d).
Two types of progenitors can be identified according to their distinct morphologies
and expression of molecular markers. Type 1 cells, expressing molecular markers
such as glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), Sry-related transcriptional factor
Sox2, Nestin, and brain lipid-binding protein (BLBP), have a radial process spanning the granule cell layer that ramifies in the inner molecular layer. Type 2 cells
have only short processes and do not express GFAP or BLBP. These progenitors
reside in a microenvironment that allows the majority of their daughter cells to differentiate into granule cells of the DG.
Existing in the microenvironment of the DG is a complex neural network
(Fig. 9.1a; Table 9.1) (Amaral and Lavenex 2007). The dentate granule cells, with
elaborate dendritic arborizations in the molecular layer, receive excitatory inputs
from the entorhinal cortex through the perforant pathway and from the hilar mossy
cells through the commissural-associational pathway. Granule cells also receive
inhibitory inputs from the local interneurons, which are distributed randomly in the
DG and can be modulated by mossy cells. The neurons in the hilus are major targets
for the inputs from other brain regions, such as the cholinergic and GABAergic
inputs from the medial septum and the basal forebrain, the serotonergic inputs from
the raphe nuclei, the norepinephrinergic inputs from the locus coeruleus, and the
dopaminergic inputs from the ventral tegmental area. Some of these input fibers
also project into the molecular layer of the DG and other areas of the hippocampus.
The major efferents from the granule cells are the mossy fiber pathways to the
pyramidal neurons of CA3. The mossy fibers also innervate the mossy cells and
interneurons in the hilus, forming both positive and negative feedback loops. In
addition to neurons, numerous local glia cells, such as astrocytes, oligodendrocytes,
and microglia, and the local vasculature play supportive roles in the neural network.
Therefore, the activity of the neural network and of all cells within this network can
exert direct and indirect influences on the process of hippocampal neurogenesis.
The phenomenon of adding new neurons in the adult hippocampus circuitry
raises interesting questions. How are new neurons produced and integrated into the
neural circuits of the adult hippocampus? How does the surrounding neural network
activity influence the process of adult hippocampal neurogenesis? How does the
incorporation of new neurons into the existing neural networks influence the function
of the hippocampus? In this chapter, we first review the basic process of neurogenesis in the hippocampus. Hippocampal neurogenesis is subject to regulation by both
intrinsic and extrinsic factors in the neurogenic microenvironment of the DG.
Several recent reviews have comprehensively summarized updated findings about
this subject (Abrous et al. 2005; Zhao et al. 2008). Here, we focus our discussion

9  Integration of New Neurons into the Adult Hippocampus

239

Fig. 9.1  Hippocampal neurogenesis. (a) Adult neurogenesis and the neural circuits in the dentate
gyrus. Type 1 and type 2 progenitors are located in the subgranular zone (SGZ) and are morphologically distinct. Type 2 progenitors are positively regulated by tonic GABA, which is released
by local interneurons (blue cells). Green cells in the granule cell layer (GCL) represent newborn
neurons at progressive stages of neuronal maturation, with their dendrites elaborating in the
molecular layer (Mol) and their axons extending towards CA3. GABA is an excitatory (plus signs)
neurotransmitter for newborn neurons younger than 2  weeks old (blue lines). During the third
week after cell birth, GABAergic inputs into newborn neurons change from excitatory to inhibitory (minus signs), which coincides with the growth of dendritic spines and the receiving of
excitatory glutamatergic inputs from entorhinal cortex in these neurons (purple lines). The red cell
in the hilus represents a mossy cell, which receives inputs from granule cells and innervates local
interneurons and granule cells (red lines). The granule cells and hilar interneurons also receive
inputs from the basal forebrain and the brain stem (orange lines) mediated by a variety of neurotransmitters, such as acetylcholine (Ach), serotonin (5HT), norepinephrine (NE), dopamine
(DA) and GABA. (b and c) Labeling of adult-born neurons in the dentate gyrus using various
approaches. In (b) green cells represent 8-week-old adult-born granule cells labeled by a GFP
expressing retrovirus; red cells represent immature adult-born neurons labeled by Dcx; blue cells,
labeled by NeuN, represent mature neurons. A horizontal section of the dentate gyrus from a
3-month-old POMC-EGFP transgenic mouse is shown in (c). Labeled cells represent immature
granule cells. oml outer molecular layer, iml inner molecular layer, gcl granule cell layer.
(d) Timeline for the development of newborn neurons in the SGZ, which is characterized by the
expression of specific molecular markers, distinct morphologic and electrophysiological properties, and functional integration. MSB multiple-synapse boutons, SSB single-synapse boutons, LTP
long-term potentiation, IEG immediate early gene. (a, b and d) Modified, with permission, from
Zhao et al. (2008). (c) modified, with permission, from Overstreet et al. (2004)

240

W. Deng et al.

Table 9.1  The neural network in the dentate gyrus
Target regions in
Anatomical origins
hippocampus
Afferents
Entorhinal cortex
Outer two thirds of MOL
Mossy cells
Medial septal nucleus,
nucleus of diagonal
band of Broca
Supermammillary body
Pontine nucleus of locus
coeruleus
Median raphe nucleus
Ventral tegmental area
Efferents
Granule cells

Target neurons

Neurotransmitters
Glu

Inner one third of MOL
Hilus

Granule cells,
interneurons
Granule cells
Granule cells,
mossy cells,
interneurons
Granule cells
n/a

Hilus (SGZ)
Hilus

Interneurons
n/a

5HT
DA

Inner one third of MOL
Inner one third of MOL,
hilus (SGZ)

Glu
GABA, Ach

Glu, Substance P
NE

Glu
CA3 pyramidal
neurons
Granule cells
Hilus
Mossy cells,
Glu
interneurons
Mossy cells
Hilus
Interneurons
Glu
Mossy cells
Inner third of MOL
Granule cells
Glu
Interneurons
GCL, hilus and MOL
Granule cells
GABA
GCL granule cell layer, MOL molecular layer, Glu glutamate, GABA g-aminobutyric acid,
NE norepinephrine, 5HT serotonin, DA dopamine, Ach acetylcholine
CA3

on how neurogenesis can be regulated by neural network activity under both
physiological and pathological conditions. In the last section, we summarize studies
suggesting the potential functions of hippocampal neurogenesis.

9.2 Morphogenesis of Newborn Neurons
in the Adult Hippocampus
Three different methods have been developed to study the morphogenesis of newborn
neurons in the adult hippocampus: (1) the combination of Bromodeoxyuridine
(BrdU) birthdating and certain immature neuron markers such as Doublecortin (Dcx)
and the polysialated form of Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule (PSA-NCAM) revealed
by immunohistochemistry (Fig.  9.1b); (2) the combination of BrdU birthdating
and transgenic mouse lines in which fluorescent protein markers are specifically
expressed in immature neurons. Two examples for such transgenic mice are POMCGFP and Dcx-dsRed, in which reporter molecules GFP and dsRed are expressed
from the pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) and dcx gene promoters, respectively.
(Brown et al. 2003; Overstreet et al. 2004) (Fig. 9.1c); and (3) retroviral labeling (van Praag
et  al. 2002) (Fig.  9.1b). Unlike the first two approaches, retrovirus-mediated cell

9  Integration of New Neurons into the Adult Hippocampus

241

labeling allows the birthdating and the direct visualization of cell morphology
simultaneously. Therefore, it has been one of the major tools used in recent years to
examine the morphological and electrophysiological properties of newborn neurons.
Newborn cells are frequently found to be clustered shortly after labeling by
BrdU or retrovirus. They may migrate tangentially from the proliferating cell clusters
before the formation of the primary radial process – the presumptive apical dendrites (Seki et al. 2007). Radial processes can be found in newborn cells as early as
2 days after BrdU labeling (Shapiro et al. 2007). The apical dendrites of newborn
cells reach the inner, middle, and outer third of the molecular layer around 10, 14,
and 17 days after cell birth, respectively (Esposito et al. 2005; Ge et al. 2006; Zhao
et al. 2006). The dendrites of most of the newborn cells reach the hippocampal fissure
by 21 days after cell birth, and the extent to which these processes continue to grow
has not been characterized (Fig. 9.1a).
Dendritic spines are the major sites of excitatory synapses on granule cells and
are first found on newborn cells during the third week after cell birth, shortly after
the apical dendrites reach the middle third of the molecular layer (Zhao et al. 2006).
The mechanism of initiation of spine growth is unclear, but it probably involves
interaction with putative afferent connections. The growth of dendritic spines reaches
a plateau around 56 days after cell birth; however, spine morphology is still subject
to change. For example, the density of mushroom spines continues to increase after
56 days (Zhao et al. 2006). Electron microscopic studies have shown that newborn
dentate granule cells form synapses on both dendritic shafts and spines (Shapiro
et al. 2007; Toni et al. 2007). Interestingly, newborn cells are more likely to form
synapses with multiple-synapse boutons when they are 3–4  weeks old than when
they are more mature (Toni et al. 2007). It has been proposed that spines from new
neurons may compete with existing spines for presynaptic terminals (Fig. 9.1a,d).
Similar to mature granule cells, newborn cells project their axons into the hilus
and CA3 area through mossy fibers. The axons of newborn granule cells can be
found in the CA3 area proximal to the DG as early as 10 days after cell labeling,
and they rapidly project to the distal CA3 area (Zhao et al. 2006). The mossy fiber
axons of the newborn cells reach the distal CA3 area as early as 16 days after cell
birth. Anatomical analyses at the electromicroscopic level showed that these mossy
fiber axons had already formed synapses with interneurons in the hilus and pyramidal
cells in the CA3 at 17 days after cell birth. The size and complexity of these efferent
synapses increase during the maturation of the cell, and they are indistinguishable
from synapses formed by unlabeled mossy fiber axons at 75 days after cell birth
(Toni et al. 2008) (Fig. 9.1a,d).
In summary, the morphogenesis of newborn granule cells is a prolonged process,
involving the establishment of cell polarity and the coordinated development of
dendrites and axons. Dendritic development includes several stages: establishment
of the primary apical dendrite, growth and branching of dendritic processes, formation and modification of dendritic spines, and formation and maturation of afferent
synapses. Similar to dendritic growth, the morphogenesis of mossy fiber axons
includes an initial rapid growth of axonal fibers and the formation and maturation
of efferent synapses.

242

W. Deng et al.

9.3 Physiological Characteristics of Newborn Neurons
in the Adult Hippocampus
The course of newborn neuron maturation can be roughly divided into five stages
with distinct physiological properties at each stage (Fig.  9.1d). The first stage is
characterized by the trophic effect of g-aminobutyric acid (GABA), which promotes
neuronal differentiation of the type 2 hippocampal progenitors (Tozuka et al. 2005).
The second stage involves the depolarization of young immature neurons by GABA
because of their higher intracellular Cl− concentration (Esposito et  al. 2005;
Overstreet-Wadiche et al. 2005; Ge et al. 2006). The GABAergic excitatory response
in immature cells appears to be critical for the maturation and integration of newborn
neurons (Ge et al. 2006). The third stage marks the transition of GABA depolarization to hyperpolarization in newborn cells, as well as the formation of glutamate
excitatory input (Esposito et al. 2005; Ge et al. 2007). This transition coincides with
the initiation of dendritic spine formation (Zhao et  al. 2006). The fourth stage is
characterized by enhanced long-term potentiation (LTP) in newborn cells, which is
reflected in the low threshold for LTP induction when the cells are 3–4 weeks old
and the higher LTP amplitude when the cells are 4–6 weeks old (Schmidt-Hieber
et al. 2004; Ge et al. 2007). The fifth stage involves the modulation and maturation
of synaptic input of newborn cells. At this stage, newborn neurons eventually display
similar physiological properties to neurons born during embryonic and postnatal
neurogenesis (van Praag et al. 2002; Laplagne et al. 2006, 2007).
The integration of newborn neurons can also be studied by examining the
expression of immediate early genes (IEGs), such as c-fos, zif268, arc, homer1a,
etc., that are rapidly induced by behavioral experience and can serve as activity
reporters for neurons (reviewed by Kubik et  al. 2007). Zif268 expression can be
detected in neurons as young as 2 weeks old, when LTP is induced in the perforant
path electrically in vivo (Bruel-Jungerman et al. 2006). This observation suggests
that newborn neurons at 2 weeks of age are able to display an activity-dependent
response despite their immature membrane properties. However, the activitydependent expression of IEGs (c-Fos, Zif268 and Homer1A) has not been detected
in 15-day-old newborn neurons following kainic acid- or pentylenetetrazol-induced
seizures (Jessberger and Kempermann 2003). Furthermore, the ratio of newborn
neurons expressing IEGs is comparable to that of older mature neurons only when
the cells are more than 5 weeks old (Jessberger and Kempermann 2003). In addition, normal hippocampal activity, such as the acquisition of Morris water maze
(MWM) and enriched environment exposure, is able to induce the expression of
activity-dependent IEGs in 6-week-old newborn neurons (Jessberger and
Kempermann 2003; Kee et al. 2007; Tashiro et al. 2007).
Although the expression of IEGs has not been detected in newborn neurons at
immature stages (0–3 weeks old) in normal behaving animals, experiences of mice
during this time window can modulate the activity of these newborn neurons in an
experience-dependent manner when they become older. Using BrdU labeling to
birthdate newborn neurons, Tashiro et  al. (2007) exposed the mice to either an

9  Integration of New Neurons into the Adult Hippocampus

243

enriched environment or home cage when the BrdU-labeled cells were 2 weeks old.
When these cells reached 6 weeks of age, the mice were re-exposed to the same
enriched environment and increased numbers of active newborn neurons were
found in the group of mice with previous exposure to the enriched environment.
However, when they trained these mice in MWM instead of re-exposure to the
enriched environment, no such increases in activity were detected. This type of
experience-dependent modulation of newborn neuron activity also occurs in adultborn olfactory granule neurons (Magavi et al. 2005).
Analysis of the expression of IEGs further reveals that adult-born neurons in the
DG may be preferentially incorporated into the neural network supporting spatial
memory. Kee et  al. (2007) birthdated newborn cells with BrdU, trained mice in
MWM at various time points after labeling and examined the expressions of c-Fos
and Arc in 10-week-old BrdU-labeled neurons after a series of memory retrieval
tests. They found that the proportion of c-Fos- or Arc-positive cells was higher in
BrdU-labeled newborn neurons than in the Neuronal Nuclei (NeuN)-labeled mature
neurons when the training occurred 4 or more weeks after BrdU labeling. In another
study, 5-month-old adult-born neurons were preferentially activated when rats were
allowed to explore a novel environment (Ramirez-Amaya et  al. 2006). However,
Jessberger and Kempermann (2003) were not able to detect this preferential activation of newborn neurons in mice trained in MWM or in mice enduring chemicalinduced seizures. The preferential incorporation of young adult-born neurons (age
4–8 weeks) is consistent with their enhanced plasticity, as discussed above. It is not
clear why the 5-month-old adult-born neurons maintained this preference, given
that adult-born neurons at this age are not morphologically or physiologically different from mature granule cells.
Together, the electrophysiological properties and the expression of the IEGs
suggest the functional integration of adult-born neurons into hippocampal circuits.
Moreover, the integrated newborn neurons are subject to experience-dependent
activation and are preferentially incorporated into spatial memory networks, suggesting the involvement of these adult-born neurons in hippocampal information
processing.

9.4 Regulation of Hippocampal Neurogenesis by Neural
Circuit Activity
Adult neurogenesis occurs in a microenvironment containing complex neural
networks. Thus, neural circuit activity in the hippocampus is a key factor in both
the proliferation of neural progenitor cells and the subsequent survival/integration
of newborn neurons. As discussed above, the granule cells receive afferents from
many brain regions (Fig. 9.1a). The putative roles of these pathways in hippocampal
neurogenesis have been examined (Table 9.2).
To examine the modulation of neurogenesis by inputs from the entorhinal cortex, Bruel-Jungerman et al. (2006) and Chun et al. (2006) induced LTP in adult rats

244

W. Deng et al.

Table 9.2  Regulation of hippocampal neurogenesis by neural circuit activity
Experimental manipulations Affected afferents/circuits
Effects on neurogenesis
LTP induction of MPP
Stimulation of perforant
Increases proliferation and
pathway
newborn cell survival
Ibotenic acid injection to
Lesion of entorhinal cortex
Increases proliferation
entorhinal cortex
Entorhinal axotomy
Lesion of perforant pathway
No effect on newborn cell
survival
Fornix/fimbria lesion
Disruption of septoDecreases proliferation
hippocampus pathway
NMDA injection to medial
Lesion of septal GABAergic
Decreases newborn cell
septum
neurons
survival
Icv infusion of 192 IgGLesion of forebrain cholinergic
Decreases proliferation and
saporin
neurons
neurogenesis
Short term pilocarpineLesion of mossy cells
Slows down newborn neuron
induced seizure
maturation
Lesion of raphe nucleus
Decreases proliferation and
5,7-DHT injection to raphe
nuclei
neurogenesis
Fetal raphe nuclei grafting
Serotonergic innervations
Increases proliferation and
neurogenesis
Systemic DSP-4 treatment
Depletion of norepinephrine
Decreases proliferation and
no effect on survival
Systemic MTPT treatment
Dopaminergic dennervations
Decreases proliferation
Electroconvulsive treatment
Brief seizures
Increases proliferation and
neurogenesis
Prolonged pilocarpineInduction of status epilepticus
Increases proliferation
induced seizures
and neurogenesis,
ectopic newborn neuron
migration, accelerated
newborn neuron
maturation
Prolonged perforant path
Induction of focal hippocampal
Increases proliferation
stimulation
seizures
Amygdala kindling
Induction of seizures
Increases proliferation
Kainic acid treatment
Induction of convulsive seizures Increases neurogenesis,
persistence of basal
dendrites, aberrant
synapse formation
LTP long-term potentiation, MPP medial perforant path, icv intracerebroventricular, 5,7-DHT
5,7-dihydroxytryptamine, DSP-4 N-(2-chloroethyl)-N-ethyl-2-bromobenzylamine hydrochloride,
MTPT 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine

by the tetanic stimulation of medial perforant path via a unilaterally implanted
electrode. This manipulation resulted in the stimulation of neural progenitor proliferation in the ipsilateral but not contralateral side of the hippocampus. LTP induction also enhances the survival of 1- to 2-week-old newborn neurons, which readily
respond to LTP stimulation by expressing immediate early gene zif268. However,
lesion of the entorhinal cortex leads to increased progenitor cell proliferation in the
DG (Cameron et al. 1995), and disruption of perforant path projection has no effect

9  Integration of New Neurons into the Adult Hippocampus

245

on the survival of newborn neurons (Fontana et al. 2006). Given the inconsistency
of these observations, it is currently unclear how the entorhinal inputs affect hippocampal neurogenesis.
Disruption of the septal/basal forebrain projection by fornix/fimbria lesion
causes a decrease in progenitor cell proliferation (Fontana et al. 2006). Infusion of
N-methyl-d-aspartic acid (NMDA) into the medial septum strongly decreases
GABAergic inputs into the hippocampus and results in a severe reduction in newborn
cell survival (Van der Borght et al. 2005). Through the septo-hippocampal pathway,
the hippocampus also receives cholinergic inputs, which have a major impact on
hippocampus-dependent learning and memory. Immunotoxic lesion of cholinergic
neurons in the medial septum leads to decreased proliferation of hippocampal progenitors and reduced neurogenesis in SGZ (Cooper-Kuhn et  al. 2004; Mohapel
et al. 2005).
The DG receives the serotonergic inputs from raphe nuclei. Neurotoxin lesion of
serotonergic neurons in raphe nuclei leads to decreased cell proliferation and neurogenesis, which can be reversed by serotonergic reinnervation (Brezun and
Daszuta 1999, 2000a,b). The role of norepinephrine in the regulation of SGZ neurogenesis has been examined by selective neurotoxic depletion of norepinephrine,
which results in decreased SGZ cell proliferation (Kulkarni et  al. 2002).
Dopaminergic fibers have been detected in the SGZ of the hippocampus. Neurotoxic
depletion of dopaminergic innervations in adult brain results in decreased cell proliferation in SGZ, which can be restored by dopaminergic reinnervation (Hoglinger
et al. 2004). The involvement of these circuitries in hippocampal neurogenesis is
also suggested by pharmacological and genetic studies of the corresponding receptors
for monoamines, which are summarized by Zhao et al. (2008).
To investigate the role of the associational/commissural afferents in hippocampal
neurogenesis, Marques-Mari et al. (2007) reported that destroying the mossy cells
by pilocarpine-induced seizure impeded the maturation of newborn neurons.
Although it is difficult to reach definitive conclusions from these studies due to the
side effects of experimental manipulations, these observations revealed the important role of neural circuit activity in the regulation of hippocampal neurogenesis.
Hippocampal neurogenesis is also influenced by aberrant neural circuit activities
under pathological or therapeutic conditions. Electroconvulsive treatment, which
induces a brief seizure in the brain and has therapeutic effects on many emotional
disorders, increases the proliferation of neural progenitors and neurogenesis in the
hippocampus (Madsen et  al. 2000; Malberg et  al. 2000). Prolonged seizures can
cause various abnormalities in hippocampal neurogenesis: (1) pilocarpine- or electrically induced seizures increase neural progenitor proliferation and neurogenesis
(Parent et  al. 1997, 1998); (2) seizures cause abnormal morphogenesis of adultborn neurons. The neurons born shortly after seizure induction ectopically extend
spiny dendrites into the hilus, suggesting the aberrant integration of these neurons
(Jessberger et  al. 2007). Another study reported that immature neurons born
1–3 weeks before seizure also possessed basal dendrites (Walter et al. 2007), which
were not detected by Jessberger and colleagues. As also seen in mature granule
cells, seizure induced the sprouting of mossy fibers in 4-week-old newborn neurons

246

W. Deng et al.

(Jessberger et al. 2007); (3) ectopic migration is often detected in seizure-induced
newborn neurons, which are abnormally located in the hilus and the molecular layer
(Parent et al. 2006). Further studies suggested that the loss of Reelin secreted by
hilar interneurons was responsible for this ectopic migration (Gong et  al. 2007);
and (4) neurons born into an epileptic environment survive for a long time after
seizure. They aberrantly integrate into the neural circuit, given the synaptic formation on their basal dendrites and their expression of c-Fos after handling-induced
seizures (Jessberger et al. 2007). In addition, seizures accelerate the integration of
newborn neurons, as indicated by both morphological and electrophysiological
parameters (Overstreet-Wadiche et al. 2006). Together, these studies suggest abnormal circuit activity leads to aberrant adult neurogenesis in the hippocampus.
The involvement of neural activity in hippocampal neurogenesis has been demonstrated in animals with behavioral experiences. Learning a hippocampus-dependent
task but not a hippocampus-independent task increases the survival of immature
newborn neurons (Gould et  al. 1999). Further studies have revealed that it was
learning but not training that increased newborn neuron survival (Leuner et  al.
2006; Sisti et al. 2007). In addition, this survival-enhancing effect is only limited to
newborn neurons at particular neuronal maturation stages (Dupret et  al. 2007).
Moreover, living in an environmental environment, which provides numerous opportunities for hippocampal stimulation, enhances the survival of newborn neuron
(Kempermann et  al. 1997a). Finally, as discussed above, abnormal hippocampal
activities, such as pilocarpine-induced seizures, also have a great impact on the
production and functional integration of newborn neurons.
Recent studies have demonstrated that there is a critical time window for the
experience-dependent enhancement of newborn neurons’ survival. Tashiro et  al.
(2007) labeled newborn cells with BrdU and exposed mice to an enriched environment for a week at various time points after BrdU labeling. They found that the
environmental enrichment only enhanced the survival of newborn neurons of 0- to
3-week-old but not that of 4-week-old neurons. Similarly, MWM learning only
enhanced the survival of newborn neurons younger than 4  weeks old (Kee et  al.
2007). Moreover, the survival of 1-to 2-week-old newborn neurons was promoted
by LTP induction in the medial perforant path (Bruel-Jungerman et al. 2006). All these
observations suggest that the activity of hippocampal circuits has a pro-survival
effect on newborn neurons within a critical time window during adult hippocampal
neurogenesis. In the olfactory bulb, activity-dependent regulation for the survival
of the newborn neurons has also been observed in a critical time period (Yamaguchi
and Mori 2005).
Neurotransmitters are among the key molecular factors that may mediate the
regulation of hippocampal neurogenesis by circuit activity. Among several classes
of neurotransmitters involved in regulating hippocampal neurogenesis, glutamate
and GABA have been extensively studied. In the brain, the excitatory inputs are
mainly mediated by glutamate. There are four major types of glutamate receptors,
including NMDA receptor, a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic
acid (AMPA) receptor, Kainate receptor and metabotrophic glutamate receptors.
Of these, the effect of NMDA signaling on hippocampal neurogenesis has been

9  Integration of New Neurons into the Adult Hippocampus

247

examined in most detail, given its key role in LTP (Nacher and McEwen 2006).
Activation of the NMDA receptor by systemic administration of NMDA results in
decreased cell proliferation in DG (Cameron et  al. 1995). In contrast, inhibiting
NMDA signaling by antagonists of NMDA receptor leads to a rapid increase in
neural progenitor proliferation (Cameron et al. 1995; Okuyama et al. 2004). This
effect can last for a few days and occurs in both young and aged animals (Nacher
et  al. 2001, 2003; Okuyama et  al. 2004). Consistently, decreased expression of
NR1, the essential subunit of NMDA receptor, correlates with increased neural
progenitor proliferation/maturation in mice (Bursztajn et  al. 2007). However,
whether this increased proliferation results in an increased production of adult-born
neuron remains controversial (Cameron et  al. 1995; Joo et  al. 2007). Similarly,
blocking the AMPA/Kainate receptors or group II metabotrophic glutamate receptors leads to an up-regulation of progenitor proliferation and/or maturation
(Bernabeu and Sharp 2000; Yoshimizu and Chaki 2004). It is not clear whether
glutamate regulates the proliferation of neural progenitors in a cell-autonomous
manner. The expression of NMDA receptors in neural progenitors and immature
adult-born neurons has been suggested by both in  vitro and in  vivo studies (Joo
et al. 2007; Nacher et al. 2007). However, hippocampal progenitors do not respond
to NMDA or AMPA stimulation in electrophysiological recordings (Tozuka et al.
2005), suggesting that NMDA signaling could have an indirect impact on the proliferation of hippocampal neural progenitors. In contrast, the survival of newborn
neurons is partially dependent on the NMDA receptor in a cell-autonomous manner
during a critical time window when these neurons start to receive glutamatergic
inputs, as revealed by the retrovirus-mediated single cell knockout of NR1 (Tashiro
et al. 2006). In addition, the survival of NR1-deficient newborn neurons is slightly
increased by the global inhibition of NMDA receptor in the critical time window,
which does not affect the survival of wildtype adult-born neurons. Thus, it is proposed that newborn neurons may compete for certain factors for their survival via
the activation of NMDA receptors, similar to activity-dependent survival of neurons
during development.
GABA is another important regulator of progenitor cell proliferation and
differentiation as well as the maturation of newborn neurons in hippocampal
neurogenesis. GABA, which is likely released from local hilar interneurons and
septal inputs, is an excitatory stimulus for the type 2 neural progenitors and
immature neurons younger than 2 weeks old (Tozuka et al. 2005; Ge et al. 2006).
Morphological studies suggest that there may be direct synaptic connections
between hilar interneurons and type 2 cells, though GABA could elicit its effects
on neural progenitors or immature neurons through tonic activation. The
GABAergic input into progenitor cells promotes the differentiation of these progenitors into neurons via the induction of proneural gene NeuroD. Consistently,
GABA agonists lead to decreased numbers of dividing type 2 progenitors and
increased numbers of newborn neurons. Furthermore, disruption of the Na-K-2Cl
cotransporter (NKCC1) decreases the intracellular Cl− ion concentration, converts
the GABA input from depolarization to hyperpolarization and significantly
impairs the maturation and synaptic integration of newborn neurons. Finally,

248

W. Deng et al.

depolarizing GABAergic network activity is stronger in postnatal mice compared
to adult animals, correlating with an increased maturation rate of newborn neurons
in postnatal DG (Overstreet-Wadiche et al. 2006).
In summary, the local circuit activity in the adult hippocampus plays an important
role in the production and subsequent integration of newborn neurons during adult
neurogenesis, with the neurotransmitters as key mediators.

9.5 Functional Implications of Hippocampal Neurogenesis
The integration of adult-born neurons into the existing circuitry of the hippocampus
indicates their involvement in hippocampus-dependent brain functions. This finding
has led to extensive investigation of the functional significance of hippocampal
neurogenesis in cognition and emotionality. The level of hippocampal neurogenesis
is correlated with emotional status: hippocampal neurogenesis is decreased in
stressed animals and is increased by anti-depressant treatments. Furthermore, the
effectiveness of anti-depressants depends on hippocampal neurogenesis. The
involvement of hippocampal neurogenesis in affective behavior will be discussed
in detail in other chapters. The potential roles of hippocampal neurogenesis in
learning and memory have been examined using both experimental approaches and
computational simulation. The computation modeling of hippocampal neurogenesis has been recently reviewed by Aimone and Wiskott (2007). We will summarize
the current experimental evidence that suggests the functional implications of hippocampal neurogenesis in learning and memory, using both correlative and reductionistic approaches.

9.5.1 Correlational Evidence
The genetic background of an animal has a major impact on hippocampal neurogenesis (Kempermann et al. 1997b). An animal’s performance in MWM correlates
with the level of hippocampal neurogenesis (Kempermann and Gage 2002).
However, this observation could be complicated by the fact that the locomotor
activity of individuals is also subject to the regulation by genetic makeup. This correlation between hippocampal neurogenesis and learning and memory has also
been found in mutant mice that have a deficiency in individual molecules. For
example, mbd1−/− mice with reduced hippocampal neurogenesis have defects in DG
LTP and are defective in both acquisition and retention of MWM (Zhao et al. 2003).
Similarly, mice deficient in FGFR1 in the central nervous system (CNS) have
reduced cell proliferation in SGZ and are defective in spatial memory consolidation
in the MWM test (Zhao et al. 2007). However, deletion of these genes during CNS
development prevents us from bridging the causal gap between adult neurogenesis
and cognition.

9  Integration of New Neurons into the Adult Hippocampus

249

The experiences of animals have a powerful influence on hippocampal neurogenesis.
Voluntary exercise increases progenitor proliferation in SGZ and selectively
enhances LTP in DG, which correlates with improved performance in MWM in
both young and aged mice (van Praag et  al. 1999, 2005). As mentioned above,
exposure to an environmental environment promotes the survival of newborn neurons and leads to improved performance in MWM in both young and aged mice
(Kempermann et al. 1997a, 1998, 2002). Stress and aging are two major negative
regulators of hippocampal neurogenesis. Although some studies suggest that
stressed animals are defective in learning and memory, the relationship between
stress and cognition is rather complicated (Shors 2004). However, it is well documented that a progressive decline in neurogenesis occurs with aging in a variety of
species ranging from rodent to primates (reviewed by Klempin and Kempermann
2007). Taking advantage of spontaneous individual difference in hippocampal neurogenesis in aged rats, a correlation between hippocampal neurogenesis and the
performance in MWM has been revealed in some but not other studies.
In general, experience-regulated hippocampal neurogenesis is correlated with the
animal’s cognitive performance. However, these environmental factors also influence structural plasticity and molecular regulations in the adult brain. It is not clear
whether the changes in hippocampal neurogenesis are the main causes for the
changed cognitive performance. It was recently reported that the beneficial effects
of the environmental enrichment on spatial memory were not dependent on SGZ
neurogenesis, which was ablated by X-ray irradiation (Meshi et al. 2006). However,
another study suggested that the improvement in object recognition memory induced
by the enriched environment required adult neurogenesis (Bruel-Jungerman et  al.
2005). In a third study using presenilin1−/− mice, the enhancement of hippocampal
neurogenesis by the environmental enrichment was attenuated (Feng et  al. 2001).
The presenilin1−/− mice formed stronger contextual fear memory when they were
exposed to an enriched environment after the acquisition of fear conditioning.
Therefore, it remains to be clarified whether hippocampal neurogenesis is a major
causal factor for the changes in cognitive behavior under these conditions.

9.5.2 Causal Evidence
To more directly examine the function of hippocampal neurogenesis, several
experimental methods have been developed to reduce adult neurogenesis. (1) Systemic
administration of anti-mitotic drugs, such as methylazoxymethanol acetate (MAM),
is able to effectively reduce hippocampal neurogenesis (Shors et  al. 2001).
However, high levels of MAM are toxic to animals and may have deleterious effects
on animals’ health (Dupret et al. 2005). (2) Low-dose irradiation of either whole
brain or restricted brain regions almost completely abolishes hippocampal neurogenesis (Wojtowicz 2006). However, irradiation induced inflammation not only has
a negative effect on neurogenesis but also harmfully influences many other processes in the brain (Monje et al. 2003). (3) Genetically engineered mouse models

250

W. Deng et al.

are able to allow more specific ablating of hippocampal neurogenesis. For example,
in GFAP-tk transgenic mice, the thymidine kinase (tk) from herpes simplex virus is
expressed in neural progenitors and astrocytes driven by the promoter of gfap gene
(Garcia et al. 2004). The proliferating tk-expressing neural progenitors are ablated
when animals are administered the nucleotide analog, ganciclovir, which disrupts
chain elongation during DNA replication. A recent study reported that the inducible
deletion of tlx (a gene encoding an orphan nuclear receptor) in adult mice led to a
reduction in hippocampal neurogenesis, though all cells in adult animals could be
affected and additional controls had to be included (Zhang et al. 2008).
Spatial learning and memory have been evaluated in animals with reduced neurogenesis, given the critical role of the hippocampus in this process. Although most
studies failed to detect any defects in spatial learning, impaired long-term retention
of spatial memory was detected in irradiated rats (Snyder et al. 2005). Furthermore,
during both training and reverse training phases, defective learning was detected in
the conditional tlx−/− mice when the gene deletion was induced in adulthood (Zhang
et  al. 2008). In addition, X-ray irradiation of 2-month-old mice led to impaired
spatial learning and memory in the Barnes maze but not in the MWM (Raber et al.
2004). However, this observation likely depends on the age of the animal. When
3-week-old mice were irradiated, they displayed impaired spatial learning and
memory in MWM but not in the Barnes maze (Rola et al. 2004). More intriguingly,
it is reported that ablating neurogenesis, using either irradiation or GFAP-tk mice,
led to an improvement in hippocampus-dependent working memory in the 8-armed
radial maze (Saxe et al. 2007).
To examine the role of hippocampal neurogenesis in hippocampus-dependent
conditioning, Shors et  al. (2001) systemically treated rats with MAM and found
that these rats failed to form conditioned responses in trace eyeblink conditioning
or trace fear conditioning. However, MAM treatment did not affect contextual fear
conditioning, which is also dependent on hippocampus (Shors et  al. 2002).
Similarly, no contextual fear conditioning defects were detected in the inducible
conditional tlx−/− mice (Zhang et al. 2008). In contrast, irradiated rats or mice and
ganciclovir-treated GFAP-tk mice were defective in contextual fear conditioning
(Saxe et al. 2006; Winocur et al. 2006).
Place and object recognition memories have also been examined in animals with
ablated neurogenesis. In a delayed, non-matching-to-sample test conducted in a
water maze, Winocur et al. (2006) reported that irradiated rats did not perform as
well as sham irradiated controls when the time interval between training and test
trials became long enough. However, object recognition memory was not affected
in irradiated or MAM-treated rats when recognition memory was examined in a
simpler context (Bruel-Jungerman et  al. 2005). Nevertheless, a place recognition
defect was detected 1 or 3 weeks after irradiation in rats (Madsen et al. 2003).
In addition, as mentioned above, MAM treatment prevented the enhancement of
object recognition memory by enriched environment (Bruel-Jungerman et al. 2005).
In summary, these studies suggest that hippocampal neurogenesis could influence the cognitive behavior of animals. However, the contradictory nature of the
results from these studies makes it difficult to reach any definitive conclusions

9  Integration of New Neurons into the Adult Hippocampus

251

about the exact functions of hippocampal neurogenesis in cognition. These
discrepancies are probably due to differences in animal species and strains, the
detailed behavior procedures and the different knockdown strategies with undesired side effects. Moreover, current studies mainly use established behavioral
tests, which are based on whole hippocampal lesion models. These methods may
not be sensitive enough to reveal the function of hippocampal neurogenesis,
since newborn neurons only constitute a small part of the anatomical structure of
the hippocampus. Therefore, to definitively demonstrate the function of SGZ
neurogenesis, selective ablation approaches with few side effects and specific
behavioral tests aimed at challenging the newborn neurons need to be developed
in the future.

9.6 Concluding Remarks
Intensive research in past decades revealed many of the detailed processes of hippocampal neurogenesis, from the proliferation of neural stem/progenitor cells, to
the differentiation of the newborn cells, to the maturation and migration of newborn
neurons and to the final integration of adult-born neurons into existing neural circuits. The process of hippocampal neurogenesis is subject to extensive regulation
by both neural circuit activities and extrinsic/intrinsic molecular factors. However,
the mechanisms of these various types of regulation are largely unknown. The integration of newborn neurons into adult hippocampal circuits has a consequence in
modulating animals’ behavior, although the exact functions of adult neurogenesis
in hippocampus-related information processing remain elusive. As discussed in
other chapters of this book, it has become clear that hippocampal neurogenesis
readily responds to pathological conditions in adult brains, which provides opportunities for new therapeutic development. Further investigations addressing these
issues will help us not only to better understand the basic biology of hippocampal
neurogenesis but also to develop new therapies to combat neurological disorders in
the adult brain.
Acknowledgments  The authors thank Jamie Simon for illustrations and Mary Lynn Gage for
helpful comments. This work is supported by National Institutes of Health, Picower Foundation,
Lookout Foundation, and J.S. McDonnell Foundations.

References
Abrous DN, Koehl M, Le Moal M (2005). Adult neurogenesis: from precursors to network and
physiology. Physiol Rev 85: 523–569.
Aimone JB, Wiskott L (2007). Computational modeling of adult neurogenesis. In: Gage FH,
Kempermann G, Song H (eds.) Adult neurogenesis. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press,
Cold Spring Harbor.

252

W. Deng et al.

Amaral D, Lavenex P (2007). Hippocampal neuroanatomy. In: Anderson P, Morris R, Amaral D,
Bliss T, O’Keefe J (eds.) The hippocampus book. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Bernabeu R, Sharp FR (2000). NMDA and AMPA/kainate glutamate receptors modulate dentate
neurogenesis and CA3 synapsin-I in normal and ischemic hippocampus. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 20: 1669–1680.
Brezun JM, Daszuta A (1999). Depletion in serotonin decreases neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus
and the subventricular zone of adult rats. Neuroscience 89: 999–1002.
Brezun JM, Daszuta A (2000a). Serotonin may stimulate granule cell proliferation in the adult
hippocampus, as observed in rats grafted with foetal raphe neurons. Eur J Neurosci 12:
391–396.
Brezun JM, Daszuta A (2000b). Serotonergic reinnervation reverses lesion-induced decreases in
PSA-NCAM labeling and proliferation of hippocampal cells in adult rats. Hippocampus 10:
37–46.
Brown JP, Couillard-Despres S, Cooper-Kuhn CM et al (2003). Transient expression of doublecortin during adult neurogenesis. J Comp Neurol 467: 1–10.
Bruel-Jungerman E, Laroche S, Rampon C (2005). New neurons in the dentate gyrus are involved
in the expression of enhanced long-term memory following environmental enrichment. Eur J
Neurosci 21: 513–521.
Bruel-Jungerman E, Davis S, Rampon C et al (2006). Long-term potentiation enhances neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 26: 5888–5893.
Bursztajn S, Falls WA, Berman SA et al (2007). Cell proliferation in the brains of NMDAR NR1
transgenic mice. Brain Res 1172: 10–20.
Cameron HA, McEwen BS, Gould E (1995). Regulation of adult neurogenesis by excitatory input
and NMDA receptor activation in the dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 15: 4687–4692.
Chun SK, Sun W, Park JJ et al (2006). Enhanced proliferation of progenitor cells following long-term
potentiation induction in the rat dentate gyrus. Neurobiol Learn Mem 86: 322–329.
Cooper-Kuhn CM, Winkler J, Kuhn HG (2004). Decreased neurogenesis after cholinergic forebrain
lesion in the adult rat. J Neurosci Res 77: 155–165.
Dupret D, Montaron MF, Drapeau E et  al (2005). Methylazoxymethanol acetate does not fully
block cell genesis in the young and aged dentate gyrus. Eur J Neurosci 22: 778–783.
Dupret D, Fabre A, Dobrossy MD et al (2007). Spatial learning depends on both the addition and
removal of new hippocampal neurons. PLoS Biol 5: e214.
Esposito MS, Piatti VC, Laplagne DA et al (2005). Neuronal differentiation in the adult hippocampus
recapitulates embryonic development. J Neurosci 25: 10074–10086.
Feng R, Rampon C, Tang YP et al (2001). Deficient neurogenesis in forebrain-specific presenilin-1
knockout mice is associated with reduced clearance of hippocampal memory traces. Neuron
32: 911–926.
Fontana X, Nacher J, Soriano E et al (2006). Cell proliferation in the adult hippocampal formation
of rodents and its modulation by entorhinal and fimbria-fornix afferents. Cereb Cortex 16:
301–312.
Garcia AD, Doan NB, Imura T et al (2004). GFAP-expressing progenitors are the principal source
of constitutive neurogenesis in adult mouse forebrain. Nat Neurosci 7: 1233–1241.
Ge S, Goh EL, Sailor KA et al (2006). GABA regulates synaptic integration of newly generated
neurons in the adult brain. Nature 439: 589–593.
Ge S, Yang CH, Hsu KS et al (2007). A critical period for enhanced synaptic plasticity in newly
generated neurons of the adult brain. Neuron 54: 559–566.
Gong C, Wang TW, Huang HS et  al (2007). Reelin regulates neuronal progenitor migration in
intact and epileptic hippocampus. J Neurosci 27: 1803–1811.
Gould E, Beylin A, Tanapat P et al (1999). Learning enhances adult neurogenesis in the hippocampal
formation. Nat Neurosci 2: 260–265.
Hoglinger GU, Rizk P, Muriel MP et al (2004). Dopamine depletion impairs precursor cell proliferation in Parkinson disease. Nat Neurosci 7: 726–735.
Jessberger S, Kempermann G (2003). Adult-born hippocampal neurons mature into activitydependent responsiveness. Eur J Neurosci 18: 2707–2712.

9  Integration of New Neurons into the Adult Hippocampus

253

Jessberger S, Zhao C, Toni N et al (2007). Seizure-associated, aberrant neurogenesis in adult rats
characterized with retrovirus-mediated cell labeling. J Neurosci 27: 9400–9407.
Joo JY, Kim BW, Lee JS et al (2007). Activation of NMDA receptors increases proliferation and
differentiation of hippocampal neural progenitor cells. J Cell Sci 120: 1358–1370.
Kee N, Teixeira CM, Wang AH et al (2007). Preferential incorporation of adult-generated granule
cells into spatial memory networks in the dentate gyrus. Nat Neurosci 10: 355–362.
Kempermann G, Gage FH (2002). Genetic determinants of adult hippocampal neurogenesis correlate with acquisition, but not probe trial performance, in the water maze task. Eur J Neurosci
16: 129–136.
Kempermann G, Kuhn HG, Gage FH (1997a). More hippocampal neurons in adult mice living in
an enriched environment. Nature 386: 493–495.
Kempermann G, Kuhn HG, Gage FH (1997b). Genetic influence on neurogenesis in the dentate
gyrus of adult mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94: 10409–10414.
Kempermann G, Kuhn HG, Gage FH (1998). Experience-induced neurogenesis in the senescent
dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 18: 3206–3212.
Kempermann G, Gast D, Gage FH (2002). Neuroplasticity in old age: sustained fivefold induction
of hippocampal neurogenesis by long-term environmental enrichment. Ann Neurol 52:
135–143.
Klempin F, Kempermann G (2007). Adult hippocampal neurogenesis and aging. Eur Arch
Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 257: 271–280.
Kubik S, Miyashita T, Guzowski JF (2007). Using immediate-early genes to map hippocampal
subregional functions. Learn Mem 14: 758–770.
Kulkarni VA, Jha S, Vaidya VA (2002). Depletion of norepinephrine decreases the proliferation,
but does not influence the survival and differentiation, of granule cell progenitors in the adult
rat hippocampus. Eur J Neurosci 16: 2008–2012.
Laplagne DA, Esposito MS, Piatti VC et al (2006). Functional convergence of neurons generated
in the developing and adult hippocampus. PLoS Biol 4: e409.
Laplagne DA, Kamienkowski JE, Esposito MS et al (2007). Similar GABAergic inputs in dentate
granule cells born during embryonic and adult neurogenesis. Eur J Neurosci 25: 2973–2981.
Leuner B, Waddell J, Gould E et  al (2006). Temporal discontiguity is neither necessary nor
sufficient for learning-induced effects on adult neurogenesis. J Neurosci 26: 13437–13442.
Madsen TM, Treschow A, Bengzon J et al (2000). Increased neurogenesis in a model of electroconvulsive therapy. Biol Psychiatry 47: 1043–1049.
Madsen TM, Kristjansen PE, Bolwig TG et  al (2003). Arrested neuronal proliferation and
impaired hippocampal function following fractionated brain irradiation in the adult rat.
Neuroscience 119: 635–642.
Magavi SS, Mitchell BD, Szentirmai O et al (2005). Adult-born and preexisting olfactory granule
neurons undergo distinct experience-dependent modifications of their olfactory responses
in vivo. J Neurosci 25: 10729–10739.
Malberg JE, Eisch AJ, Nestler EJ et al (2000). Chronic antidepressant treatment increases neurogenesis in adult rat hippocampus. J Neurosci 20: 9104–9110.
Marques-Mari AI, Nacher J, Crespo C et  al (2007). Loss of input from the mossy cells blocks
maturation of newly generated granule cells. Hippocampus 17: 510–524.
Meshi D, Drew MR, Saxe M et al (2006). Hippocampal neurogenesis is not required for behavioral
effects of environmental enrichment. Nat Neurosci 9: 729–731.
Mohapel P, Leanza G, Kokaia M et al (2005). Forebrain acetylcholine regulates adult hippocampal
neurogenesis and learning. Neurobiol Aging 26: 939–946.
Monje ML, Toda H, Palmer TD (2003). Inflammatory blockade restores adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Science 302: 1760–1765.
Nacher J, McEwen BS (2006). The role of N-methyl-D-asparate receptors in neurogenesis.
Hippocampus 16: 267–270.
Nacher J, Rosell DR, Alonso-Llosa G et al (2001). NMDA receptor antagonist treatment induces
a long-lasting increase in the number of proliferating cells, PSA-NCAM-immunoreactive
granule neurons and radial glia in the adult rat dentate gyrus. Eur J Neurosci 13: 512–520.

254

W. Deng et al.

Nacher J, Alonso-Llosa G, Rosell DR et al (2003). NMDA receptor antagonist treatment increases
the production of new neurons in the aged rat hippocampus. Neurobiol Aging 24: 273–284.
Nacher J, Varea E, Miguel Blasco-Ibanez J et al (2007). N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor expression
during adult neurogenesis in the rat dentate gyrus. Neuroscience 144: 855–864.
Okuyama N, Takagi N, Kawai T et al (2004). Phosphorylation of extracellular-regulating kinase
in NMDA receptor antagonist-induced newly generated neurons in the adult rat dentate gyrus.
J Neurochem 88: 717–725.
Overstreet LS, Hentges ST, Bumaschny VF et  al (2004). A transgenic marker for newly born
granule cells in dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 24: 3251–3259.
Overstreet Wadiche L, Bromberg DA, Bensen AL et al (2005). GABAergic signaling to newborn
neurons in dentate gyrus. J Neurophysiol 94: 4528–4532.
Overstreet-Wadiche LS, Bromberg DA, Bensen AL et  al (2006). Seizures accelerate functional
integration of adult-generated granule cells. J Neurosci 26: 4095–4103.
Parent JM, Yu TW, Leibowitz RT et al (1997). Dentate granule cell neurogenesis is increased by
seizures and contributes to aberrant network reorganization in the adult rat hippocampus.
J Neurosci 17: 3727–3738.
Parent JM, Janumpalli S, McNamara JO et al (1998). Increased dentate granule cell neurogenesis
following amygdala kindling in the adult rat. Neurosci Lett 247: 9–12.
Parent JM, Elliott RC, Pleasure SJ et al (2006). Aberrant seizure-induced neurogenesis in experimental temporal lobe epilepsy. Ann Neurol 59: 81–91.
Raber J, Rola R, LeFevour A et al (2004). Radiation-induced cognitive impairments are associated
with changes in indicators of hippocampal neurogenesis. Radiat Res 162: 39–47.
Ramirez-Amaya V, Marrone DF, Gage FH et al (2006). Integration of new neurons into functional
neural networks. J Neurosci 26: 12237–12241.
Rola R, Raber J, Rizk A et al (2004). Radiation-induced impairment of hippocampal neurogenesis
is associated with cognitive deficits in young mice. Exp Neurol 188: 316–330.
Saxe MD, Battaglia F, Wang JW et  al (2006). Ablation of hippocampal neurogenesis impairs
contextual fear conditioning and synaptic plasticity in the dentate gyrus. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 103: 17501–17506.
Saxe MD, Malleret G, Vronskaya S et al (2007). Paradoxical influence of hippocampal neurogenesis
on working memory. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104: 4642–4646.
Schmidt-Hieber C, Jonas P, Bischofberger J (2004). Enhanced synaptic plasticity in newly generated
granule cells of the adult hippocampus. Nature 429: 184–187.
Seki T, Namba T, Mochizuki H et al (2007). Clustering, migration, and neurite formation of neural
precursor cells in the adult rat hippocampus. J Comp Neurol 502: 275–290.
Shapiro LA, Upadhyaya P, Ribak CE (2007). Spatiotemporal profile of dendritic outgrowth from
newly born granule cells in the adult rat dentate gyrus. Brain Res 1149: 30–37.
Shors TJ (2004). Learning during stressful times. Learn Mem 11: 137–144.
Shors TJ, Miesegaes G, Beylin A et al (2001). Neurogenesis in the adult is involved in the formation
of trace memories. Nature 410: 372–376.
Shors TJ, Townsend DA, Zhao M et al (2002). Neurogenesis may relate to some but not all types
of hippocampal-dependent learning. Hippocampus 12: 578–584.
Sisti HM, Glass AL, Shors TJ (2007). Neurogenesis and the spacing effect: learning over time
enhances memory and the survival of new neurons. Learn Mem 14: 368–375.
Snyder JS, Hong NS, McDonald RJ et al (2005). A role for adult neurogenesis in spatial long-term
memory. Neuroscience 130: 843–852.
Tashiro A, Zhao C, Gage FH (2006). Retrovirus-mediated single-cell gene knockout technique in
adult newborn neurons in vivo. Nat Protoc 1: 3049–3055.
Tashiro A, Makino H, Gage FH (2007). Experience-specific functional modification of the dentate
gyrus through adult neurogenesis: a critical period during an immature stage. J Neurosci 27:
3252–3259.
Toni N, Teng EM, Bushong EA et  al (2007). Synapse formation on neurons born in the adult
hippocampus. Nat Neurosci 10: 727–734.

9  Integration of New Neurons into the Adult Hippocampus

255

Toni N, Laplagne DA, Zhao C et al (2008). Neurons born in the adult dentate gyrus form functional synapses with target cells. Nat Neurosci 11: 901–907.
Tozuka Y, Fukuda S, Namba T et al (2005). GABAergic excitation promotes neuronal differentiation
in adult hippocampal progenitor cells. Neuron 47: 803–815.
Van der Borght K, Mulder J, Keijser JN et al (2005). Input from the medial septum regulates adult
hippocampal neurogenesis. Brain Res Bull 67: 117–125.
van Praag H, Christie BR, Sejnowski TJ et al (1999). Running enhances neurogenesis, learning,
and long-term potentiation in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96: 13427–13431.
van Praag H, Schinder AF, Christie BR et  al (2002). Functional neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus. Nature 415: 1030–1034.
van Praag H, Shubert T, Zhao C et al (2005). Exercise enhances learning and hippocampal neurogenesis in aged mice. J Neurosci 25: 8680–8685.
Walter C, Murphy BL, Pun RY et al (2007). Pilocarpine-induced seizures cause selective timedependent changes to adult-generated hippocampal dentate granule cells. J Neurosci 27:
7541–7552.
Winocur G, Wojtowicz JM, Sekeres M et  al (2006). Inhibition of neurogenesis interferes with
hippocampus-dependent memory function. Hippocampus 16: 296–304.
Wojtowicz JM (2006). Irradiation as an experimental tool in studies of adult neurogenesis.
Hippocampus 16: 261–266.
Yamaguchi M, Mori K (2005). Critical period for sensory experience-dependent survival of newly
generated granule cells in the adult mouse olfactory bulb. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:
9697–9702.
Yoshimizu T, Chaki S (2004). Increased cell proliferation in the adult mouse hippocampus following
chronic administration of group II metabotropic glutamate receptor antagonist, MGS0039.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 315: 493–496.
Zhang CL, Zou Y, He W et al (2008). A role for adult TLX-positive neural stem cells in learning
and behaviour. Nature 451: 1004–1007.
Zhao X, Ueba T, Christie BR et al (2003). Mice lacking methyl-CpG binding protein 1 have deficits
in adult neurogenesis and hippocampal function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100: 6777–6782.
Zhao C, Teng EM, Summers RG, Jr. et al (2006). Distinct morphological stages of dentate granule
neuron maturation in the adult mouse hippocampus. J Neurosci 26: 3–11.
Zhao M, Li D, Shimazu K et al (2007). Fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 is required for longterm potentiation, memory consolidation, and neurogenesis. Biol Psychiatry 62: 381–390.
Zhao C, Deng W, Gage FH (2008). Mechanisms and functional implications of adult neurogenesis.
Cell 132: 645–660.

Chapter 10

Adult Neurogenesis in the Hippocampus:
Lessons from Natural Populations
Jan Martin Wojtowicz

Abstract  Laboratory research on adult neurogenesis is proceeding at a tremendous
pace and contributing important details about the mechanism of cell development
and function. A novel approach in the ultimate understanding of the functional
role of young neurons and their value for species survival involves studies on
natural populations of animals. Ecologically based research has already contributed to the understanding of some outstanding issues and two lessons have
been learned thus far. (1) Neurogenesis plays a role in only certain types of
hippocampus-dependent learning tasks. (2) The age-related decline of neurogenesis is a species-dependent adaptation related to an animal’s life span. Better
understanding of the adaptive role of neurogenesis will require both laboratory
research on inbred rodents, and studies on diverse species adapted to their natural
environment.

10.1 Introduction
The past decade has seen a great expansion of research into the mechanisms of
regulation and functionality of adult-born neurons. There is now a reasonable
understanding of neurogenesis as a multi-step process, with its gradual progression
from mother precursor cells to a proliferating population of progenitors, and finally
to differentiated and mature neurons. There are also data on dendritic and axonal
extension, synaptogenesis, and basic connectivity of differentiated neurons. Finally,
there is already sufficient knowledge of electrophysiological properties and
afferent inputs to ascertain that the new cells are connected within the hippocampal
circuitry (Wang et al., 2000; Snyder et al., 2001; Ge et al., 2005; Piatti et al., 2006;
Schmidt-Hieber et al., 2004; Toni et al., 2008).

J.M. Wojtowicz (*)
Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
e-mail: martin.wojtowicz@utoronto.ca

T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_10, © Springer 2011

257

258

J.M. Wojtowicz

Numerous physiological and environmental factors regulate neuronal production.
Common behaviours, such as running, sleeping, learning, sexual interactions or
exposure to stress, influence the rate of neurogenesis. Most evidence comes from
laboratory rodents; this is a problem since rodents such as rats and mice originated
as species around 55 million years ago, when they diverged from other mammalian
taxa. The functional adaptations of new neurons in the adult brain may have evolved
differently within different species of rodents, and certainly in other non-rodent
species, yet very little is known about their neurogenesis. In fact, evidence for adult
neurogenesis in other mammalian species is weak and mostly qualitative. There can
be no doubt that adult neurogenesis occurs in almost all mammals (Lindsey and
Tropepe, 2006) and its conservation in diverse species over millions of years
­testifies to its evolutionary advantage. However, our understanding of its general
significance is limited by short-sighted experimenters who use only a limited number
of dominant experimental approaches to the exclusion of others.
One hint as to the possible role of neurogenesis is its prominence in juveniles
and young adults in comparison to middle-aged and old individuals. This feature
was first observed by Seki and Arai (1995) and Kuhn et al. (1996) in rats and later
confirmed in mice (Kempermann et al., 2002). It is also present, although not as
well documented, in monkeys (Gould et al., 1999), humans (Eriksson et al., 1998;
Manganas et al., 2008) and several other species. One of the outstanding questions
in neurogenesis research is the meaning of this decline with age. Is the age-related
effect the result of reduced demand for new neurons or is it a pre-determined
property analogous to a decline in the egg-producing capacity of the ovaries? There
is also a possibility that reduced production of new neurons is not indicative of
lesser function, since the proportion of new neurons that is utilized could be growing
with age or at least staying the same while the functionality of other neurons in the
rest of the brain declines. Finally, the evidence from laboratory rodents suggests
that neurogenesis is regulated by environment, so the decline with age may be a
reflection of reduced interactions of the aging animals with the environment. If the
age-dependent decline of neurogenesis is closely tied to specific functions of the
new neurons, we must first know what these functions are in order to understand
the decline.
In 2000 a group of scientists proposed the initiation of studies on neurogenesis in
natural populations, with the assertion that only through better understanding of the
function of young adult-born neurons in wild animals living in their natural environment will we be able to grasp the real, i.e. adaptive role of adult neurogenesis
(Boonstra et al., 2001). Two subsequent articles emphasizing the need for studies
of natural populations and the potential advantages of such an approach have been
published. Lindsey and Tropepe (2006) presented a survey of neurogenesis in the
vertebrates. Amrein et al., (2008) contended that more studies of natural populations are needed to better understand the adaptive benefits of adult neurogenesis
and gave hints as to how such studies could be performed. This article will not
attempt to extend those previous efforts, but will instead address two controversial
issues arising from laboratory studies that efforts,but illustrate how such specific
issues can be resolved with the help of studies in natural populations.

10  Adult Neurogenesis in the Hippocampus

259

10.2 Lesson 1: Neurogenesis Is Critical for Some Types
of Memory but Dispensable for Others
Hippocampus is often associated with spatial learning and navigation. Among
mammals, including primates, hippocampal lesions cause deficits in spatial learning
(Driscoll and Sutherland, 2005). In humans, London cab drivers are recognized for
their detailed knowledge of the London streets and the ability to locate particular
sites of the city with amazing accuracy. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) on a
representative group of the cab drivers showed that the posterior hippocampus was
significantly larger than that of individuals within the general population (Maguire
et al., 2000). The posterior part of hippocampus in primates is anatomically equivalent to the dorsal hippocampus in the four-legged species. It is this dorsal part of
the hippocampus that is known to support spatial learning in laboratory rodents, in
contrast to the ventral part of the hippocampus that supports anxiety-related behaviours (Moser et al., 1995; Kjelstrup et al., 2002; Bannerman et al., 2004; Pothuizen
et  al., 2004; Pentkowski et  al., 2006). While this dorso-ventral (septo-caudal)
specialization of the hippocampus holds true for the CA1 field, the relevance to the
dentate gyrus is less certain. The dentate gyrus occupies about one third of the total
hippocampus and most experiments involving measurements of the hippocampal
size do not distinguish between the size of CA1 or CA3 vs. the dentate gyrus.
Similarly, many experiments employing lesions or MRI do not distinguish between
CA1 and dentate gyrus. A case can be made for CA1 being primarily responsible
for spatial learning on the basis of lesions, electrophysiological and pharmacological
experiments. The CA1, CA3 and dentate gyrus have evolved differently (West,
1990) and the ability to support adult neurogenesis only by the dentate gyrus is a
manifestation of these differences. Thus, although dentate gyrus, CA3 and CA1
may be expected to work within the framework of the classical tri-synaptic circuit,
there is also reason to postulate that direct afferent inputs from the entorhinal cortex
to CA1 or CA3 may have evolved to support certain types of learning without the
involvement of the dentate gyrus.
Turning now to studies of adult neurogenesis in the context of the hippocampus
as a whole: the most compelling evidence for the functional role of newly-generated
neurons comes from “lesion” experiments in which neurogenesis was suppressed
by a known amount and the lesioned animals tested on various behavioral tasks in
comparison to intact controls (Winocur et al., 2006; Wojtowicz et al., 2008; Saxe
et al., 2006). For the purposes of this article we will discuss primarily the learning
tasks that are dependent on the hippocampus. In this context the neurogenic subgranular zone in dentate gyrus is of high importance, being strategically located at
the gateway of the hippocampus.
The perforant pathway carries over 90% of the hippocampal afferent axons originating in the entorhinal cortex and forms the first relay station of the “tri-synaptic
circuit” in the dentate gyrus (Fig. 10.1). In view of the massive neuronal production
in the subgranular zone and dense, forest-like dendritic branching of young neurons
throughout the dentate gyrus molecular layer, it seems likely that any afferent input

260

J.M. Wojtowicz

Fig. 10.1  Hippocampal circuitry showing the location of new neurons. (a) Diagram shows the
classical tri-synaptic circuit consisting of dentate gyrus, CA3, and CA1 as well as direct pathways
from Entorhinal cortex to CA3 and CA1. Dentate to CA3 mossy fiber pathway includes axons of
mature (red) and immature (green) granule neurons. In contrast, the direct pathways do not
include young neurons. (b) Images illustrating a transverse section through the dentate gyrus in a
juvenile red squirrel with abundant young neurons located at the border of hilus and granule cell
layer (GCL). Green stain (Doublecortin) is a marker if immature neurons. Note that Doublecortin
is present in cell bodies, dendrites and mossy fibers axons of the young neurons suggesting that
these neurons, while still young, are already integrated within hippocampal circuit

entering through the dentate gyrus will in some way engage these young neurons.
This hypothesis is supported by evidence of enhanced plasticity of the young
neurons in comparison to the pre-existing mature neurons (Abrous and Wojtowicz,
2008). The numerical prominence of young neurons is well illustrated in an image of
an immunohistochemically stained section obtained from a juvenile (approximately
6 months old) red squirrel (Tamiasciurus hudsonicus) (Fig. 10.1). The high density

10  Adult Neurogenesis in the Hippocampus

261

of the young neurons is striking but not unique for squirrels. Juvenile rats that are
approximately 1  month old have similar numbers of such neurons (see Fig.  10.3).
Consequently, one might expect that any behavioural tasks involving the hippocampus should also involve the young neurons.
The evidence obtained thus far suggests large differences in sensitivities of various
learning tasks to the rate of neurogenesis. These differences can be illustrated by a
comparison of two prototypical hippocampal learning tasks: the spatial water maze
(WM) and contextual fear conditioning (CFC). Using a beam of high-energy radiation directed to the head one can selectively and irreversibly ablate proliferating
neural progenitors in the dentate gyrus, leaving mature neurons and other nonneuronal cells intact (Wojtowicz, 2006). The permanent reduction in the young
neuronal population provides an opportunity to test animals with reduced yet stable
levels of ongoing neurogenesis without complication of activity-induced recovery
(see below). This approach can be complemented with other experiments that can
enhance neurogenesis, although at this time there is no method of enhancement that
can approach the selectivity and robustness of the irradiation-induced ablation.
A comparison of animals with varied degrees of neurogenesis in WM and CFC
tasks showed that while the latter is extremely sensitive to changes in neurogenesis
the former is not. The “readout” of CFC is the time of sitting still or “freezing”
when the subject is exposed to a threatening environment (context). Less freezing
time is interpreted as a weaker memory. In several studies done so far on mice and
rats, a proportionality of the number of the young neurons to the performance in
CFC task has been found. An 80% reduction in neurogenesis produced an 80%
reduction in the freezing time (Winocur et al., 2006). In contrast, neither training
performance nor the 24  h memory of the platform location was impaired in the
water maze, even after a 90% reduction of neurogenesis (Snyder et al., 2005). A
side by side comparison of performances on CFC and WM by the same animals
showed a remarkable 69% reduction of freezing in CFC after a 69% depletion of
neurogenesis, but again no effect on spatial learning (Wojtowicz et al., 2008). The
proportionality of CFC is also present in individual animals that show individual
variations in the densities of young neurons. This applies equally well to intact and
to irradiated animals, ruling out unknown and unrelated side effects of irradiation.
This correlation of memory with the number of young neurons further suggests that
the difference between the two learning tasks is not simply a difference in sensitivity of one task over the other, but a qualitative, fundamental specialization of neurogenesis for certain learning tasks. These experiments raise the possibility that
neurogenesis has evolved to perform specific functions within the hippocampal
circuit. In relation to natural populations the CFC may be relevant to recognition of
a threatening situation, possibly associated with the presence of predators. The
exact proportionality of the memory to the number of available young neurons is
unprecedented. In previous studies, near complete ablations of the hippocampus
spared most of the learning performance in spatial tasks, suggesting redundancy in
the hippocampal pathways or perhaps compensation by non-hippocampal brain
regions (Moser et al., 1995). The lack of such compensation in case of CFC suggests
an indispensable and fundamental requirement for neurogenesis.

262

J.M. Wojtowicz

The dependence of CFC on neurogenesis fits well with evidence for a role of
CA3–CA1 connection via the Schaffer collaterals in CFC. Schaffer collaterals are
downstream from the dentate gyrus in the tri-synaptic circuit so their blockade
would be expected to have similar effect as the depletion of neurogenesis.
Increasingly selective transgenic mouse models revealed that inactivation of CA3
to CA1 projection blocks the CFC memory but leaves the basic aspects of spatial
learning intact (Nakashiba et al., 2008). Since all of the axons of the young dentate
granule neurons project towards the CA3 their effects would be expected to be also
blocked by the inactivation of the CA3 output to CA1 (see Fig. 10.1).
Spatial learning and memory are not completely immune to reductions in neurogenesis. Changes in acquisition and/or retention have been reported (Zhang et al.,
2008a; Snyder et al., 2005). The most consistent defect seen in the irradiated and
transgenic animals is in the lack of long-term memory (Rola et al., 2004; Imayoshi
et al., 2008). There is also at least one report of enhanced learning in animals with
reduced neurogenesis (Saxe et  al., 2007). A possible explanation for these varied
effects is that fewer young neurons make the hippocampal circuit more susceptible
to interference with learning by behavioral “noise”, i.e. sensory stimuli that are not
directly related to the task at hand (Becker, 2005). This theory deserves further
experimental scrutiny, but the interference-effect is not specific for any particular
learning task (spatial or non-spatial). Thus, while the dependence of spatial learning
on neurogenesis is weak and indirect, that of CFC is strong and proportional to the
number of available neurons. The sharp contrast between CFC and spatial learning
does not mean that only CFC is dependent on neurogenesis. Other hippocampal
tasks, such as the delayed non-matching to sample (DNMTS) and trace eye-blink
conditioning, are also impaired in animals with depleted neurogenesis (Shors et al.,
2001, 2002; Winocur et al., 2006). Future research involving natural populations will
be essential to determine which one of these laboratory tests represents a situation
that may have a greater significance for an animal’s survival in natural conditions.
Particular adaptations are likely to be species-dependent.
Radiation-induced consequences of reduced neurogenesis were seen in adult
(>3 months old) rats and mice. It is not yet known whether older animals are equally,
less, or more sensitive. It is conceivable that with smaller numbers of available
neurons older animals adapt to use a higher percentage of these neurons. There may
also be a larger variability in older animals. For example, the well established phenomenon that older animals can be subdivided into two categories, cognitively
impaired and unimpaired, has been correlated with neurogenesis, although there is no
universal agreement on the nature of this correlation (Bizon et al., 2004; Drapeau
et al., 2003). In one such study old rats were trained on the WM task, and their performance in terms of reduced swimming times while searching for a hidden
platform was correlated with the survival of 1–2 week old neurons (Drapeau et al.,
2007). This result suggests that neurogenesis can somehow be enhanced by spatial
learning. The activity-dependent enhancement of neurogenesis, especially during
the 1–2  week critical period, is a well established phenomenon in young and old
animals, but it is difficult to understand why the type of learning that does not
require neurogenesis would increase its rate. One explanation arises from a study by

10  Adult Neurogenesis in the Hippocampus

263

Snyder et al., (2008) who found that young neurons activated during WM acquisition are predominantly found in the ventral dentate gyrus, suggesting that the
activity of the young neurons may be related to the anxiety or fear-related aspect of
the WM task and not to its spatial learning component.
The basic tenet of this article is that laboratory tests involving either decreases
or increases in neurogenesis can be suggestive, but are unlikely to be decisive
considering their artificial nature and the use of inbred animals. The CFC task, for
example, involves shocking the animal with electrical current applied to the metal
grid at the bottom of the cage, hardly a likely scenario in the natural environment.
Ultimately, one needs a test in real-life conditions where the animals have to
survive in their natural environment by learning life-saving tasks. This article
argues that there is a need for studies in the natural environment in order to understand the adaptive role of neurogenesis. The relationship between spatial learning
and neurogenesis is a case in point. Spatial navigation that an animal requires to
find and store food and to locate appropriate nesting areas and mates is an essential
survival skill, but is it dependent on neurogenesis? We have previously reported
that a comparison of two species of wild living rodents with differing needs for
spatial navigation did not produce good correlation with neurogenesis. Thus, grey
squirrels (Sciurus carolinensis), typical scatter hoarders, had a relatively larger
number of proliferating cells but about equal number of young neurons in comparison to chipmunks (Tamias amoenus). Yet, the chipmunks have much lesser
spatial requirements (Barker et  al., 2005). The larger ratio of proliferating to
surviving cells could reflect higher turnover of new neurons, but a simpler explanation is that there may simply not be a fundamental need for neurogenesis in
spatial behaviours. Another case in point is an illuminating study on several
species of bats (Chiroptera) ­showing that a majority of bat species had no detectable neurogenesis in the hippocampus (Amrein et al., 2007) (Fig. 10.2). Considering
that bats are known for their excellent spatial navigation (Holland et al., 2005)
and that their hippocampus is essentially the same as those of most other mammals
(Amrein et al., 2007), this striking observation appears to exclude neurogenesis as
an essential property for spatial learning.
If it’s not spatial learning, what other function or essential role can be assigned to
neurogenesis? Further surveys of various species with particular adaptations to their
environment may provide more clues. The strong dependence of CFC on neurogenesis suggests that animals that rely on freezing as a survival strategy should have
high levels of neurogenesis. In contrast, species that have a high need for spatial
navigation, such as most predators, should not, although specialization of the new
neurons for other yet unknown functions cannot be excluded. Such a comparative
approach could be complemented by the ultimate causality experiment, in which it
may be possible to alter the levels of neurogenesis in species such as squirrels and test
their survival skills in the natural environment. It is feasible to capture these animals,
irradiate them selectively to reduce number of young neurons, and release them back
to the their habitat. With the use of telemetry one could monitor their survival and
ability to avoid predators, and then trap them again to verify their health, and the level
of neurogenesis.

264

J.M. Wojtowicz

Fig. 10.2  Lack of neurogenesis in the big brown bat (Eptesicus fuscus) hippocampus. Representative
brain sections stained for a neuronal marker (NeuN), left column, and immature neuronal marker
(Doublecortin), right column. (a, b) Hippocampal section from the brain of a juvenile, 3 week old
bat. (c, d) Adult (>1 year) male. Well defined granule cell layer (GCL) and Hilus can be seen at
both ages. Bright puncta in the adult tissue (d) were probably due to endogenous fluorescence
in blood vessels and are unrelated to neurogenesis. (e, f) Olfactory bulb from the same juvenile animal
had strong NeuN (e) and doublecortin (f) immunoreactivity. The data were obtained in the laboratory
of the author (unpublished). The bat specimens were provided by Dr. D.M. Reeder, Bucknell
University, Lewisburg, PA. http://www.facstaff.bucknell.edu/dreeder

10  Adult Neurogenesis in the Hippocampus

265

In addition to the specific learning skills that may or may not depend on
neurogenesis, there is an outstanding question of why and how neurogenesis is
regulated in real life conditions. Here again the laboratory tests fall short, since they
are done on animals living in artificial conditions. An example is the regulation of
neurogenesis by so-called “enriched environment”. It has been reported that placing
laboratory rats or mice in large cages equipped with running wheel and various
novel objects, which the animals can explore, enhances neurogenesis several-fold
(Kempermann et al., 1997). This implies that wild rats, living in infinitely complex
(“enriched”) surroundings, should possess comparatively larger numbers of new
neurons. However, this is not the case. A study that compared wild rats with their
laboratory equivalents of known ages revealed virtually the same levels of neurogenesis in both populations (Epp et al., 2008; Jennifer Barker, personal communication). This finding shows that laboratory tests can give false and misleading
impression as to the importance of regulatory factors, and ultimately a real life
comparison reveals the truth.

10.3 Lesson 2: Rate of Neurogenesis Is Adapted
to Animal’s Age
One of the areas where studies of animals in natural conditions could contribute
most is the issue of how aging and neurogenesis are related. The evidence for
decline in brain function with age, including the rate of neurogenesis in laboratory
animals, is plentiful but is it relevant to real life conditions? Laboratory rats survive
for 2–3 years but they are very different from their wild counterparts. Animals in a
laboratory condition are exposed to limited environmental stimuli, surplus of water
and food, and absence of predators and competitors. Additionally, the inbred strains
of rats held in the laboratory are usually less aggressive and more sensitive to stress
(Kunzl et al., 2003). This raises the possibility that the rapid decline of neurogenesis within 2–3 months is an artifact of the impoverished living conditions and of
abnormal inbred traits that have little relevance to the real world.
Thus, the decline of neurogenesis during aging should be investigated in other
species that have evolved to survive in their natural environment. It has been
suggested that new neurons may be most important for learning novel, newlyencountered tasks that may be encountered in very young animals, but less important for learning in adult and aging animals that presumably had experienced all
there is to know (Kempermann et al., 2004; Wiskott et al., 2006). Although this idea
seems reasonable it should not be interpreted as evidence for lack of importance of
neurogenesis in adult or aging animals. In fact, data from adult rats (3–5 months
old) that show dramatically reduced contextual learning after irradiation suggest
that the remaining young neurons in adult brain are nevertheless critically important
(Wojtowicz et al., 2008).

266

J.M. Wojtowicz

Is the age-related decline in neurogenesis an artifact of impoverished living
conditions encountered by the laboratory animals? Enticing evidence for such an
argument comes from studies of van Praag and colleagues who showed that placing
mice in an “enriched environment” consisting of larger cages with various objects,
including running wheels, enhances neurogenesis in aging animals towards the
levels encountered in the young ones (van Praag et al., 2005; Kempermann et al.,
2002). If this is the case in natural conditions, what might be the levels of neurogenesis
in old wild animals that presumably encounter even more enriched environment that
the simulated “enriched environment” in the laboratory can provide? Surprising data
emerged from a comparison of the numbers of young neurons in a population of wild
mice and rats with their laboratory counterparts. Amrein and colleagues quantified
the densities of cells immuno-positive for Ki-67, a marker for proliferating cells, in
laboratory mice and several related species of rodents (Amrein et al., 2004). These
data suggest that laboratory mice place in the middle of the range covered by the
wild species and not at the low end of the scale as would be expected from their
“impoverished environment”. Similarly, a comparison of laboratory rats with their
wild counterparts shows generally similar levels of neurogenesis and a decline of
neurogenesis in both populations with a time constant of about 3–4  months, i.e.
about 10–15% of the rat’s average life span in the laboratory, even though the wild
animals must encounter a much more complex environment (Epp et al., 2008). It is
likely that the wild rat’s life span is much shorter than that of the laboratory rat due
to stress, predators and disease. Consequently, the decline of neurogenesis within
the first year of life could be an adaptation to this short life. One study, carried out
on a large population of brown rats (Rattus norvegicus) living in natural conditions,
estimated that over 95% of the animals survive for less than 1 year. Approximately
50% of rats dies within 12 weeks of tagging but this varies with time of birth, sex
etc. (Davis, 1948). Thus, although the exact chronological ages of these animals
were not known, the life span of wild rats is likely to be on the order of a few months
and not a few years as in the laboratory rat.
The experiments on aging in the wild are often hampered by the difficulty of not
knowing the exact ages of the animals caught, but a few data sets are available. The
aforementioned study on rats used the weights of the eye lenses that correlate
closely with age during the first year of life (Barker et  al., 2003). The older the
animal, the heavier the lens. In other species surviving for several years, the yearly
growth rings (annuli) in femoral bones or jaws can give a measure of age (Barker
et al., 2005). One striking finding in one such study was the relatively small decline
in the density of immature neurons with age in wild populations of chipmunks and
squirrels. On average, the density of the young neurons in adults was about half of
that seen in juveniles instead of the 90% decline observed in laboratory rats.
Correspondingly, the time constant of the decay of neurogenesis was much longer
in chipmunks in comparison to laboratory rats (Fig. 10.3). The oldest chipmunks
that could be caught in the wild were 5 years old and the time constant of the decay
of neurogenesis was equal to the real life longevity for this species, i.e. 5  years.
Thus, in chipmunks the decay is much slower than in rats, taking their respective
and very different life-spans into account. Similar data were obtained in eastern

10  Adult Neurogenesis in the Hippocampus

267

Fig. 10.3  Decline of neurogenesis with age is much slower in a wild-living species in comparison
to the laboratory rat. (a) Decline of neurogenesis with age in the Sprague-Dawley rat. Total numbers of Doublecortin-positive (DCX+) young neurons per dentate gyrus were measured in control,
untreated rats as described in (McDonald and Wojtowicz, 2005; Zhang et al., 2008b). The values
were re-calculated per mm3 of granule cell layer (GCL) and fitted to a single exponential function.
The time constant of decay t was 104  days. This is less than 15% of the average life span in
laboratory conditions for this species. (b) Decline of neurogenesis in wild chipmunks shows a
decline with a time constant of 5.1 years. This is equivalent to the maximum life span of this
species in the wild. Data based on Barker et al. (2005) and Barker (2005). Note that the extrapolated, initial values of neurogenesis are comparable in the two species but the decay rates are
dramatically different. This mis-match between neurogenesis and aging in the rat may be the
result of artificially prolonged life under laboratory conditions

grey squirrels, i.e. the decay rate of young neurons with age was proportional to the
squirrels’ longevity and consequently much slower than in laboratory rats (Barker
et al., 2005).

10.4 Future Directions
Further studies should take into consideration the possibility that measurements
of levels of neurogenesis used thus far may not be adequately informative. Instead
of measuring “snap shot” values of proliferating or young neurons one may want

268

J.M. Wojtowicz

to measure the rates of cell turnover. This is best done with the use of BrdU in
combination with the increasing repertoire of markers expressed at various stages
of neurogenesis. Another quantum leap in studies of wild animals may be achieved
with new, non-invasive measures of neurogenesis such as magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) (Manganas et al., 2008). With this method one could trap animals,
measure the magnitude of the biomarker corresponding to the rate of neurogenesis,
and release the animals back to their natural environment. This type of real life
longitudinal study could reveal how neurogenesis is regulated in different seasons
or with aging. In combination with irradiation, MRS could be the ideal tool to study
the role of neurogenesis in the wild.
Acknowledgements  My personal thanks to Ms. Yao Fang Tan, Mrs. Marianne Hegström-Wojtowicz
and Dr. Harold Atwood for their help with the manuscript, to Dr. Rudy Boonstra for inspiration,
and to NSERC and CIHR, Canada for grant support.

References
Abrous DN, Wojtowicz JM (2008) Neurogenesis and the hippocampal memory system. In: Adult
Neurogenesis (Gage FH, Kempermann G, Song H-J, eds), pp 445–462. Cold Spring Harbor:
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.
Amrein I, Slomianka L, Lipp HP (2004) Granule cell number, cell death and cell proliferation in
the dentate gyrus of wild-living rodents. Eur J Neurosci 20: 3342–3350.
Amrein I, Dechmann DK, Winter Y, Lipp H-P (2007) Absent or low rate of adult neurogenesis in
the hippocampus of bats (chiroptera). PLoS One 2: e455.
Amrein I, Boonstra R, Lipp H-P, Wojtowicz JM (2008) Adult hippocampal neurogenesis in natural
populations of mammals. In: Adult Neurogenesis (Gage FH, Kempermann G, Song H-J, eds),
pp 645–659. Cold Spring Harbor: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.
Bannerman DM, Rawlins JN, McHugh SB, Deacon RM, Yee BK, Bast T, Zhang WN, Pothuizen HH,
Feldon J (2004) Regional dissociations within the hippocampus–memory and anxiety.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 28: 273–283.
Barker (2005) MSc Thesis, University of Toronto.
Barker JM, Boonstra R, Schulte-Hostedde AI (2003) Age determination in yellow-pine chipmunks (Tamias amoenus): a comparison of eye lens masses and bone sections. Can J Zool 81:
1774–1779.
Barker J, Wojtowicz JM, Boonstra R (2005) Where is my dinner? Adult neurogenesis in freeliving food-storing rodents. Genes Brain Behav 4: 89–98.
Becker S (2005) A computational principle for hippocampal learning and neurogenesis.
Hippocampus 15: 722–738.
Bizon JL, Lee HJ, Gallagher M (2004) Neurogenesis in a rat model of age-related cognitive
decline. Aging Cell 3: 227–234.
Boonstra R, Galea LAM, Matthews S, Wojtowicz JM (2001) Hippocampal neurogenesis in natural
populations. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 79: 297–302.
Davis DE (1948) The survival of wild brown rats on a Maryland farm. Ecology 29: 437–448.
Drapeau E, Mayo W, Aurousseau C, Le Moal M, Piazza PV, Abrous DN (2003) Spatial memory
performances of aged rats in the water maze predict levels of hippocampal neurogenesis. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 100: 14385–14390.
Drapeau E, Montaron MF, Aguerre S, Abrous DN (2007) Learning-induced survival of new neurons
depends on the cognitive status of aged rats. J Neurosci 27: 6037–6044.
Driscoll I, Sutherland RJ (2005) The aging hippocampus: navigating between rat and human
experiments. Rev Neurosci 16: 87–121.

10  Adult Neurogenesis in the Hippocampus

269

Epp JR, Barker JM, Galea LAM (2008) Running wild: neurogenesis in the hippocampus across
the life span in wild and laboratory-bred Norway rats. Hippocampus 19: 1040–1049.
Eriksson PS, Perfilieva E, Bjork-Eriksson T, Alborn AM, Nordborg C, Peterson DA, Gage FH
(1998) Neurogenesis in the adult human hippocampus. Nat Med 4: 1313–1317.
Ge S, Goh ELK, Sailor KA, Kitabatake Y, Ming G-L, Song H (2005) GABA regulates synaptic
integration of newly generated neurons in the adult brain. Nature 439: 589–593.
Gould E, Reeves AJ, Fallah M, Tanapat P, Gross CG, Fuchs E (1999) Hippocampal neurogenesis
in adult Old World primates. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96: 5263–5267.
Holland RA, Winter P, Waters DA (2005) Sensory systems and spatial memory in the fruit bat
Rousettus aegyptiacus. Ethology 111: 715–525.
Imayoshi I, Sakamoto M, Ohtsuka T, Takao K, Miyakawa T, Yamaguchi M, Mori K, Ikeda T,
Itohara S, Kageyama R (2008) Roles of continuous neurogenesis in the structural and functional integrity of the adult forebrain. Nat Neurosci 11: 1153–1161.
Kempermann G, Kuhn HG, Gage FH (1997) More hippocampal neurons in adult mice living in
an enriched environment. Nature 386: 493–495.
Kempermann G, Gast D, Gage FG (2002) Neuroplasticity in old age: sustained fivefold induction of
hippocampal neurogenesis by long term environmental enrichment. Ann Neurol 52: 135–143.
Kempermann G, Wiskott L, Gage FH (2004) Functional significance of adult neurogenesis. Curr
Opin Neurobiol 14: 186–191.
Kjelstrup KG, Tuvnes FA, Steffenach HA, Murison R, Moser EI, Moser M-B (2002) Reduced fear
expression after lesions of the ventral hippocampus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99: 10825–10830.
Kuhn HG, Dickinson-Anson H, Gage FG (1996) Neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the adult
rat: age-related decrease of neuronal progenitor proliferation. J Neurosci 16: 2027–2033.
Kunzl CS, Kaiser E, Meier E, Sachser N (2003) Is a wild mammal kept and reared in captivity
still a wild animal? Horm Behav 43: 187–196.
Lindsey BW, Tropepe V (2006) A comparative framework for understanding the biological principles of adult neurogenesis. Prog Neurobiol 80: 281–307.
Maguire EA, Gadian DG, Johnsrude IS, Good CD, Ashburner J, Frackowiak RS, Frith CD (2000)
Navigation-related structural change in the hippocampi of taxi drivers. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 97: 4398–4403.
Manganas LN, Zhang X, Li Y, Hazel RD, Smith SD, Wagshul ME, Henn F, Benveniste H, Djuric
PM, Enikolopov G, Maletic-Savatic M (2008) Magnetic resonance spectroscopy identifies
neural progenitor cells in the live human brain. Science 318: 980–985.
McDonald HY, Wojtowicz JM (2005) Dynamics of neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of adult rats.
Neurosci Lett 385: 70–75.
Moser M-B, Moser EI, Forster EA, Andersen P, Morris RG (1995) Spatial learning with a minislab
in the dorsal hippocampus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92: 9697–9701.
Nakashiba T, Young JZ, McHugh TJ, Buhl DL, Tonegawa S (2008) Transgenic inhibition of synaptic
transmission reveals role of CA3 output in hippocampal learning. Science 319: 1260–1264.
Pentkowski NS, Blanchard DC, Lever C, Litvin Y, Blanchard RJ (2006) Effects of lesions to
the dorsal and ventral hippocampus on defensive behaviors in rats. Eur J Neurosci 23:
2185–2196.
Piatti VC, Esposito MS, Schinder AF (2006) The timing of neuronal development in adult hippocampal neurogenesis. The Neuroscientist 12: 463–468.
Pothuizen HH, Zhang WN, Jongen-Relo AL, Feldon J, Yee BK (2004) Dissociation of function
between the dorsal and the ventral hippocampus in spatial learning abilities of the rat: a withinsubject, within-task comparison of reference and working spatial memory. Eur J Neurosci 19:
705–712.
Rola R, Raber J, Rizk A, Otsuka S, VandenBerg SR, Morhardt DR, Fike JR (2004) Radiationinduced impairment of hippocampal neurogenesis is associated with cognitive deficits in
young mice. Exp Neurol 188: 316–330.
Saxe MD, Battaglia F, Wang J-W, Melleret G, David DJ, Monckton JE, Garcia ADR, Sofroniev MV,
Kandel ER, Santarelli L, Hen R, Drew MR (2006) Ablation of hippocampal neurogenesis
impairs contextual fear conditioning and synaptic plasticity in the dentate gyrus. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 103: 17501–17506.

270

J.M. Wojtowicz

Saxe MD, Malleret G, Vronskaya S, Mendez I, Garcia AD, Sofroniew MV, Kandel ER, Hen R
(2007) Paradoxical influence of hippocampal neurogenesis on working memory. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 104: 4642–4646.
Schmidt-Hieber C, Jonas P, Bischofberger J (2004) Enhanced synaptic plasticity in newly generated granule cells of the adult hippocampus. Nature 429: 184–187.
Seki T, Arai Y (1995) Age-related production of new granule cells in the adult dentate gyrus.
Neuroreport 6: 2479–2482.
Shors TJ, Miesegaes G, Beylin A, Zhao M, Rydel T, Gould E (2001) Neurogenesis in the adult is
involved in the formation of trace memories. Nature 410: 372–376.
Shors TJ, Townsend DA, Zhao M, Kozorovitskiy Y, Gould E (2002) Neurogenesis may relate to
some but not all types of hippocampal-dependent learning. Hippocampus 12: 578–584.
Snyder JS, Kee N, Wojtowicz JM (2001) Effects of adult neurogenesis on synaptic plasticity in
the rat dentate gyrus. J Neurophysiol 85: 2423–2431.
Snyder JS, Hong N, McDonald RJ, Wojtowicz JM (2005) A role for adult hippocampal neurogenesis in spatial long-term memory. Neuroscience 130: 843–852.
Snyder JS, Radik R, Wojtowicz JM, Cameron HA (2008) Anatomical gradients of neurogenesis
and activity: young neurons in the ventral dentate gyrus are activated by water maze training.
Hippocampus 19: 360–370.
Toni N, Laplange DA, Zhao C, Lombardi G, Ribak CE, Gage FG, Schinder AF (2008) Neurons
born in the adult dentate gyrus form functional synapses with target cells. Nat Neurosci 11:
901–907.
van Praag H, Shubert T, Zhao Ch, Gage FG (2005) Exercise enhances learning and hippocampal
neurogenesis in aged mice. J Neurosci 28: 8680–8685.
Wang S, Scott BW, Wojtowicz JM (2000) Heterogenous properties of dentate gyrus granule neurons
in the adult rat. J Neurobiol 42: 248–257.
West MJ (1990) Stereological studies of the hippocampus: a comparison of the hippocampal
subdivisions of diverse species including hedgehogs, laboratory rodents, wild mice and men.
Prog Brain Res 83: 13–36.
Winocur G, Wojtowicz JM, Sekers M, Snyder JS, Wang S (2006) Inhibition of neurogenesis
interferes with hippocampal-dependent memory function. Hippocampus 16: 296–304.
Wiskott L, Rasch MJ, Kempermann G (2006) A functional hypothesis for adult hippocampal
neurogenesis: avoidance of catastrophic interference in the dentate gyrus. Hippocampus 16:
329–343.
Wojtowicz JM (2006) Irradiation as an experimental tool in studies of adult neurogenesis.
Hippocampus 16: 261–266.
Wojtowicz JM, Askew ML, Winocur G (2008) The effects of running and inhibiting adult neurogenesis on learning and memory in rats. Eur J Neurosci 27: 1494–1502.
Zhang C-L, Zou Y, He W, Gage FG, Evans RM (2008a) A role for adult TLX-positive neural stem
cells in learning and behaviour. Nature 451: 1004–1007.
Zhang W-J, Tan Y-F, Yue JT-Y, Vranic M, Wojtowicz JM (2008b) Impairment of hippocampal
neurogenesis in streptozotocin-treated diabetic rats. Acta Neurol Scand 117: 205–210.

Chapter 11

Regulation of Adult Neurogenesis
by Environment and Learning
Gerd Kempermann

Abstract  Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is tightly linked to hippocampal
­function. This chapter covers the regulation of adult neurogenesis in response to
either a relatively broad cognitive stimulus, an environmental enrichment, or ­specific
learning situations. In contrast to more general behavioral stimuli, exemplified by
voluntary wheel running, which induce precursor cell proliferation, such cognitive challenges promote the survival of newborn cells, presumably recruiting them
for a specific function. Supposedly this function is closely related to the neuronal
network, to which the new neurons are added; that is, the mossy fiber connection
between the dentate gyrus, as the only location in which adult neurogenesis occurs
in the hippocampus, and CA3. The key idea is that activity-dependent regulation
of adult neurogenesis allows lifelong optimization of the mossy fiber connection,
presumably allowing the system to efficiently respond to novelty and complexity
encountered by the individual.

11.1 Introduction
“Regulation” of adult neurogenesis takes place on several conceptual levels,
­ranging from behavior down to the molecular control of neuronal development.
Ultimately, however, all regulation must reach the molecular level. But it is the
behavioral context, not these elementary molecular mechanisms, that fundamentally distinguishes adult neurogenesis from embryonic and fetal neurogenesis.
In fact, adult neurogenesis shares many molecular principles with embryonic neurogenesis, although certain distinctions will exist. But what is uniquely different in
adult neurogenesis compared to brain development in utero is the activity-dependent
control. In embryonic neurogenesis, the activity-dependent component largely

G. Kempermann (*)
Genomics of Regeneration, CRTD – Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, DFG
Forschungszentrum und Excellenzcluster, Tatzberg 47 – 49, 01307 Dresden, Germany
e-mail: gerd.kempermann@crt-dresden.de
T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_11, © Springer 2011

271

272

G. Kempermann

relates to the integration, survival, and fine-tuned integration of the neurons. In
adult neurogenesis, activity also controls the precursor cells and their expansion, so
that the entire process of neurogenesis is linked to how the adult individual acts in
its environment. This interaction is largely subsumed under the term “learning” in
the sense that learning is the persistent response of an individual to experience. This
chapter covers a few concepts placing adult neurogenesis in a behavioral context by
outlining how new neurons are elicited by learning.

11.2 The Experimental Concept of Enriched Environments
Originating from an anecdotal report by Donald Hebb in 1947 (Hebb, 1947), the
research paradigm of environmental enrichment was established in the 1950s. It
gained immense popularity in the early 1960s that reached its height in the late
1960s and 1970s (Rosenzweig and Bennett, 1996). The underlying core concept is
to expose laboratory animals to an environment that is richer in stimuli of various
domains than the standard housing and to assess the effect of this enrichment on the
parameters of interest. Overall, consequences of this treatment are remarkable and
allow the assessment of a number of ethological relevant effects under controlled
conditions in the laboratory.
Despite the many strengths of the paradigm, one standard argument against this
kind of research has been the notion that such “enrichment” would actually represent a severe impoverishment by feral standards. Although there is some truth to
this argument, the key point is missed, first of all because the rodents used in these
experiments are not feral animals either. They have been inbred for many, sometimes hundreds of, generations in a laboratory setting and have never seen wildlife
conditions. Mice and rats experience the enriched environment consequently as
stressing. Enrichment is still associated, however, with a large range of positive
effects on almost all parameters that can be measured. “Superenrichment,” that is,
an enrichment to conditions more closely resembling the wild, often only increased
the size of the effects but did not lead to fundamentally different results, although,
for example, in males larger space allowed for larger territories and consequently
reduced stress (Marashi et  al., 2003). Impoverishment of laboratory animals, for
example, by social isolation, in contrast had corresponding negative effects
(Stranahan et al., 2006).
In general, enrichment effects are always relative to what is defined as standard.
They cannot be used to gain much insight into absolute effect sizes that would be
realistic under feral conditions, although for evaluating the directionality of effects
and identifying the underlying principles this restriction is unlikely to matter. One
needs to be aware, however, that extrapolation to a less reductionist setting that
goes beyond qualitative statements will always be difficult.
In explaining the broad effects of environmental enrichment on animals, two
theories prevailed: the “arousal theory” by Walsh and Cummins (Walsh and
Cummins, 1975) and the “learning theory” favored by Rosenzweig and Bennett

11  Regulation of Adult Neurogenesis by Environment and Learning

273

(Rosenzweig and Bennett, 1996). Both ideas have merits, and they are not as
­mutually exclusive than the debates of the time might suggest. Nevertheless, in a
more mechanistic (or even molecular) sense the paradigm is notoriously hard to
decipher. If it is reductionist, it is so on a very different level than most other studies
we do in the laboratory. The main advantage is that the manipulation is entirely
noninvasive and might be the best compromise when addressing natural complexity
in highly controlled laboratory research with animals.

11.3 Exposure to an Enriched Environment Stimulates
Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis
Exposure to an enriched environment increases adult hippocampal neurogenesis by
exerting a survival-promoting effect on the progeny of the newborn immature neurons in the dentate gyrus (Kempermann et al., 1997b). That report in 1997 represented the first demonstration of a positive regulation of adult neurogenesis and the
first functional link of adult neurogenesis to a physiological situation. The fact that
experience of environmental complexity stimulated adult neurogenesis, and did so
even in old age (Kempermann et  al., 1998b), argued against the idea that adult
neurogenesis might be a mere atavism. It seemed likely that “arousal” and “learning”
here led to a relative specific response in cellular plasticity. The ensuing finding that
voluntary physical activity was sufficient to increase adult neurogenesis in an acute
setting (Van Praag et al., 1999) – the effect decreases again after prolonged exercise
(Kronenberg et  al., 2006) – suggested that the more arousing stimulus could
actually be separated from the one that induced “learning.” The nonspecific stimulus,
as exemplified by physical activity, might set the stage on which a more specific
learning stimulus, as ­supposedly prevalent in an enriched environment, might act.
Although environmental enrichment shows primarily a recruitment effect on
newborn neurons, physical activity induces the proliferation of type 2a progenitor
cells, that is, cells before or shortly after neuronal determination (Kronenberg et al.,
2003; Steiner et al., 2008). Sustained physical activity has additional effects in that
the normally occurring age-related decrease in the population of cycling progenitor
cells is reduced (Kronenberg et  al., 2006). Presumably in the absence of more
cognitive stimuli the maintained elevated level of precursor cell activity, however,
was not translated into increased net neurogenesis. Similar preserving effects could
be found in prolonged exposure to an enriched environment (Kempermann and
Gage, 1999; Kempermann et al., 2002). Even when the mice were withdrawn from
the enriched conditions cell proliferation remained elevated, as if in ­expectation of
further stimuli (Kempermann and Gage, 1999). When naïve mice were exposed to
environmental enrichment for the first time in older age, the ­relative effect was even
greater than in young animals (Kempermann et  al., 1998b), ­suggesting that the
stimuli mobilized all available resources.
Neither environmental enrichment nor physical activity stimulated neurogenesis
in the adult olfactory bulb (Brown et al., 1999). Exposure to olfactory complexity,

274

G. Kempermann

however, increased neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb but was not sufficient to elicit
a similar response in the hippocampus (Rochefort et al., 2002). Although the first
result is plausible, the second seems surprising given the ­putative contribution of
adult hippocampal neurogenesis to coping with the ­complexity and novelty of
­situations and the fact that the olfactory system is the primary sensory input for
rodents, in which this study was done. Additional studies to solve this ­contradiction
are required.

11.4 Genetic Influence on the Activity-Dependent Regulation
of Adult Neurogenesis
Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is also influenced by a large natural variation,
which in a laboratory setting can be addressed by studying strain differences
(Kempermann et al., 1997a, 2006; Kempermann and Gage, 2002a,b). The genetic
background also affects how the mice (and adult neurogenesis) respond to
­environmental enrichment. In strain 129/SvJ mice the stimulation of neurogenesis
by environmental enrichment appeared much stronger than in canonical strain
C57BL/6, but no side-by-side analysis of both strains was made (Kempermann
et al., 1998a). The key difference was that in 129/SvJ exposure to environmental
enrichment also elicited a response on the level of the proliferating precursor cells,
which has never been reported for C57BL/6. This observation raised a number of
interesting questions about how nature and nurture interact in the control of adult
neurogenesis. The almost dichotomic situation in C57BL/6, which nicely separates
effects on the precursor cell level from those on the newborn neuron depending on
the type of stimulus, might be unusual. Exploiting such strain differences might be
one promising strategy to decipher the genetic complexity underlying the activitydependent regulation of adult neurogenesis.

11.5 What Benefit Does Adult Neurogenesis Confer?
129/SvJ mice that perform poorly on many behavioral tests, including those testing
hippocampal learning, also showed a strong improvement in performance after
having been exposed to environmental enrichment (Kempermann et  al., 1998a).
Such improvement was also seen in C57BL/6, but this strain performs well anyway
(Kempermann et al., 1997b). Taken together, both results suggested that a presumably reciprocal link might exist between “learning” and adult neurogenesis.
Learning stimulated adult neurogenesis, and increased adult neurogenesis was
associated with improved learning performance. Dupret et al. were able to demonstrate this interdependency in one single experiment, in which they found that
besides the active integration of the new cells, a similarly active elimination of the
superfluous new neurons is required (Dupret et al., 2007).

11  Regulation of Adult Neurogenesis by Environment and Learning

275

If learning stimulates adult neurogenesis, it appears reasonable to hypothesize
that the new neurons might in some way contribute to the function that induces the
recruitment of the new neurons. The key question is what this function might be.
The past few years have seen a tremendous progress in research on the question
of how adult neurogenesis contributes to hippocampal function (Shors et al., 2001,
2002; Snyder et  al., 2005; Saxe et  al., 2006, 2007; Winocur et  al., 2006; Dupret
et al., 2008). The new neurons contribute to the mossy fiber connection between the
dentate gyrus and CA3, by itself a highly plastic structure, which constitutes a
bottleneck within the network of the hippocampus. It thus seems that input to CA3
should be as lean as possible but as strong as necessary to allow the individual to
cope with novelty and complexity of the environment (Kempermann, 2002). In that
scenario, the new neurons would provide an effective way to prevent catastrophic
interference in CA3 (Wiskott et al., 2006). Related to this idea is the concept that
the new neurons contribute to temporal separation of input patterns (Aimone et al.,
2006). Friedman commented on this hypothesis by pointing out that, alternatively,
the dentate gyrus (and with it the new neurons) might rather play a role in determining the age of memories (Friedman, 2007). A few other computational models have
been proposed (Becker, 2005; Becker and Wojtowicz, 2007), and Butz and colleagues reported the interesting idea that regulation of neurogenesis is based on a
functional homeostasis (Butz et al., 2006, 2008). A “grand unifying theory” is still
lacking. There can be little doubt, however, that the new neurons do contribute to
hippocampal function. The reason that the “true” solution has not yet been unraveled might be a lack of appropriate behavioral tests.

11.6 Learning-Induced Regulation of Adult Neurogenesis
Initially, information on whether learning might regulate adult neurogenesis had
been confusing because one of the two initial studies had found a survival-promoting
effect of water-maze learning on adult neurogenesis (Gould et al., 1999) whereas the
similar other study did not (Van Praag et al., 1999). It had been noted immediately
that the reason for the apparently contradictory results might lie in the details of the
experimental design (Greenough et al., 1999). This difference in temporal design of
the studies led to the idea of a critical time window in the development of the new
cells for the stimulus to elicit the neurogenic response. This idea is further discussed
in the following paragraph. There were also a few confounding effects of the test
itself, presumably caused by stress (Ehninger and Kempermann, 2006).
The newborn neurons show an upregulation of immediate early genes in
response to a learning stimulus (Jessberger and Kempermann, 2003; Kee et  al.,
2007b), and the activated cells become preferentially integrated (Kee et al., 2007a).
This participation of the new neurons in the neuronal network activity (so far as
such integration is indicated by the appropriate upregulation of activity-dependent
genes) is also found in environmental enrichment. In that situation the new neurons

276

G. Kempermann

even showed some preference for a novel stimulus (as opposed to a familiar one)
and remained associated with that stimulus (Tashiro et  al., 2007). A similar
­observation had previously been made for adult neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb,
where Magavi and colleagues discovered that the new neurons showed a preference
for new odors (Magavi et al., 2005).
Nora Abrous and her colleagues have analyzed the water-maze paradigm in
great detail and found that the learning stimuli elicit a characteristic sequence of
events. As predicted, there was a survival-promoting effect on newborn neurons.
In addition, cell death of other cells that were obviously not recruited was enhanced
and, in a later phase, precursor cell proliferation was induced (Dobrossy et  al.,
2003; Dupret et al., 2007). The latter is consistent with the idea that the nonspecific
regulation of cell proliferation is preparing the dentate gyrus for future situations of
novelty and complexity, in which new neurons might be needed. This potential for
preparing the hippocampus for future demands on cellular plasticity might be
­considered a “neurogenic reserve” (Kempermann, 2008). The “neurogenic reserve
hypothesis” states that over long periods of times the functional contribution of
adult neurogenesis to the hippocampus lies in providing a potential to respond to a
computationally challenging situation with incorporating new neurons. The
­neurogenic reserve hypothesis is compatible with several theories of how individual
new neurons might contribute to hippocampal function, although certain assumptions have to be made. Adult neurogenesis and its function should be cumulative
rather than reflecting a turnover, and Bruel-Jungerman and colleagues found that
long-term potentiation (LTP), the putative electrophysiological correlate of “learning,” induced neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus in  vivo (Bruel-Jungerman
et al., 2006). It is not known how far environmental enrichment is associated with
increased LTP in the hippocampus, and the question remained whether in this
­particular experimental setting LTP might not have been an equivalent of very
generic neuronal activity rather than the simulation of concrete learning.
Nevertheless, the observation further suggested a link between functionally relevant
network activity and the regulation of adult neurogenesis.

11.7 Is There a Critical Time Window for the Effects
of Environmental Enrichment on Adult Neurogenesis?
The new neurons themselves go through a period of increased synaptic plasticity.
Ex vivo, the threshold to induce LTP in the new neurons was reduced compared to
mature granule cells (Wang et al., 2000; Schmidt-Hieber et al., 2004). In animals
with experimentally reduced adult neurogenesis, this type of LTP is abolished
(Saxe et al., 2006). The period of increased synaptic plasticity constitutes a critical
time window in which the recruitment of the new neurons has to take place (Ge et al.,
2007). This idea is in line with other examples from developmental biology, most
notably from the visual system (Hensch et al., 1998). There, the period of increased
plasticity is crucially dependent on GABAA signaling (Fagiolini et  al., 2004).

11  Regulation of Adult Neurogenesis by Environment and Learning

277

The early steps of adult neurogenesis also require g-aminobutyric acid (GABA),
which acts in excitatory fashion at this stage (Tozuka et  al., 2005) as well as in
synaptic integration (Ge et  al., 2006). On the other hand, adult neurogenesis is
dependent on NMDA receptor signaling (Gould et al., 1994; Cameron et al., 1995;
Nacher et al., 2003; Okuyama et al., 2004), with some more or less indirect evidence
suggesting that it might be the N-methyl-d-aspartic acid (NMDA) ­receptors on hilar
interneurons that control the effect (Petrus et al., 2009). On the other hand, GABA
and NMDA signaling affect adult neurogenesis at more than one stage, and the
resulting pattern of interdependencies appears complex. For this reason, the LTP
data cannot yet be directly linked to individual stages of neuronal development. It
is not yet fully clear when the critical time window begins, but it appears to set in
after the cells have become postmitotic. In mice this period is characterized by the
transient expression of calretinin (Brandt et  al., 2003), but if and how calretinin
plays any functional role for the period of increased sensitivity to glutamate
(and GABA) remains to be shown.
Environmental enrichment affects the late progenitor cells (type 3 cells) and postmitotic neurons (Steiner et  al., 2008), which express GABA receptors (Wang
et al., 2005) but probably no NMDA receptors (Nacher and McEwen, 2006; Petrus
et al., 2009). At the same time, environmental enrichment strongly affects calretininexpressing postmitotic cells (Kronenberg et  al., 2003, 2006). The new ­neurons
mature into activity-dependent responsiveness over a period of up to 7  weeks
(Jessberger and Kempermann, 2003), after which they become indistinguishable
from older granule cells (van Praag et al., 2002). The sensitivity of new neurons to
activity elicited by environmental enrichment during this period has been directly
visualized (Tashiro et al., 2007). Again, the selective and stimulus-specific integration of the new neurons is NMDA receptor dependent, and at this stage the effect
appears to be direct rather than via the interneurons (Tashiro et al., 2006).
From the data on the critical time window it follows that the described ­separation
of the effects of “activity” on adult hippocampal neurogenesis into a nonspecific
and a specific phase is a convenient construct and represents a reductionist view. In
reality, the two aspects intertwine.

11.8 Affective Behavior and Adult Neurogenesis
Because the hippocampus plays a role not only in learning and memory but also in
affective behavior, adult hippocampal neurogenesis might also play a role in
­emotions (Sahay and Hen, 2007). This potential link plays a central role in the
hypothesis that failing adult hippocampal neurogenesis might be involved in
the pathogenesis of affective disorders such as major depression and schizophrenia
(Jacobs et al., 2000; Kempermann and Kronenberg, 2003; Duman, 2004; Sahay and
Hen, 2007). In addition to correlational data, one study showed by inhibiting adult
neurogenesis through irradiation that antidepressants lost their anxiolytic effect,
suggesting that anxiolysis (at least via serotonergic interventions) depended on

278

G. Kempermann

adult neurogenesis (Santarelli et al., 2003). This same strong association was not
detectable in another mouse strain, however, so that the functional connection
might not be as straightforward as initially thought (Holick et al., 2008). Patients
with affective disorders often show learning deficits, primarily in the sense of
pseudodementia. Because learning is to a large degree dependent on emotional
input to the hippocampus (and presumably the dentate gyrus), new neurons might
also be involved in this mediation. This link has not yet been further explored.
Environmental enrichment and physical activity both enhance adult neurogenesis,
improve learning, and act against depression: the question is if a causal link among
these three effects exists.
With respect to the regulation of adult neurogenesis by affective behavior, most
data exist on stress. In numerous paradigms acute stress was found to downregulate
adult neurogenesis (Cameron and Gould, 1994; Gould et  al., 1997; Gould and
Tanapat, 1999). In a more chronic paradigm the picture has been less clear, but
overall the impression that stress is detrimental to neurogenesis holds (Heine et al.,
2004, 2005). Dysregulation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis has
been considered as the key mechanism, but levels of glucocorticoids in serum alone
cannot explain the effects. Interestingly, both physical exercise and environmental
enrichment, with their robust positive effect on adult neurogenesis, also increase
corticosterone levels in the animals (Van Praag et  al., 1999; Kempermann et  al.,
2002). Interestingly, in a comparison of neurogenesis in two rat strains, ListerHooded and Sprague-Dawley, the difference in the response of adult neurogenesis
to antidepressant treatment appeared to depend on corresponding differences in
activity of the adrenal glands (Alahmed and Herbert, 2008).
In a genetic model of depression, the Flinders Sensitive Line, adult neurogenesis
was found to be increased rather than decreased as one might have expected
(Petersen et al., 2008). Here, an antidepressant (escitalopram) reduced cell proliferation. Presumably, this result might tell more about the complex genetics than about
the interaction between affective behavior and the regulation of adult neurogenesis.
Data about “affective behavior” other than those for depression and related
issues are scarce, although from the perspective of “enrichment” the influence of
positive emotions on neurogenesis would be interesting. However, Mak and colleagues reported that male pheromones induced adult neurogenesis in female mice
(Mak et al., 2007). The authors argue that this regulation of neurogenesis might be
important for reproductive success, which from an evolutionary perspective is
­certainly an interesting thought.

11.9 Candidate Regulators for the Enrichment Effects
on Adult Neurogenesis
To date no sound conclusions can be made whether the activity-dependent regulation of adult neurogenesis is characterized by particular factors that play no role or
at least a much lesser role in controlling baseline neurogenesis. The following

11  Regulation of Adult Neurogenesis by Environment and Learning

279

p­ aragraph is not meant to cover in greater detail the topic of how adult neurogenesis
is regulated on a molecular level. Only a few exemplary studies are included, in
which the attempt has been made to address a particular role of these factors in
activity-dependent regulation.
Historically much emphasis has been placed on the role of glucocorticoid
­receptor signaling, which is of particular interest in the context of aging research.
Neonatal handling makes rodent pups more resistant to stress later in life (Mohammed
et al., 1993). These results are consequently included in the foregoing section
on “stress.”
Related to the roles of affective behavior in controlling adult neurogenesis, it
was found that exercise-induced regulation of cell proliferation in the adult hippocampus required beta-endorphin signaling (Koehl et al., 2008).
A few studies have addressed the question of how the exercise-induced effect is
mediated. A study by Trejo and colleagues argued that insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF-1) is necessary for the observed effects (Trejo et al., 2001). There was, however, also a strong effect of manipulating IGF-1 on baseline neurogenesis. Fabel
et  al. described a similar role of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
(Fabel et al., 2003). Thus, obviously neither IGF-1 nor VEGF can explain the entire
effect. Given the complexity of the regulation, it seems unlikely that a single gene
might explain much of the net effect.
Still, similar to the findings for voluntary exercise, a few studies have found that
the manipulation of individual genes affected how adult neurogenesis responded to
the enrichment stimulus. For VEGF and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF),
this was shown rather convincingly (Cao et al., 2004; Rossi et al., 2006), but again
both studies are difficult to correlate with each other. For both factors together, a
strong case could be made, but the appropriate experiment on the interaction effect
is still missing. In any case, the role of both VEGF and BDNF in the control of adult
neurogenesis seems so basic that the effect can hardly qualify as “specific” to the
enrichment-induced role.
Along similar lines but more difficult to explain is the finding from Feng et al.
that in presenilin-1 knockout mice the upregulation of adult neurogenesis in
response to environmental enrichment was strongly reduced (Feng et al., 2001). On
a separate note, this report is best known for its speculation that adult neurogenesis
might allow the hippocampus to forget rather than to learn.
In a few other cases, exposure to an enriched environment has been included into
an experiment addressing the potential role of a gene of interest in the regulation of
adult neurogenesis: the lysophosphatidic receptor LPA1, for example (Matas-Rico
et  al., 2008). In these examples, however, manipulation of the gene affected
­baseline neurogenesis so that conclusions on the contribution of that factor to
­enri­chment-induced stimulation become problematic.
Identification of factors that are effective in manipulating adult neurogenesis is
only the first step in understanding “regulation.”
From a systems perspective the key idea might be that neuronal activity,
­mediated by glutamatergic signaling and modulated by other transmitter systems,
most notably serotonin, elicits the secretion of neurotrophic factors. Peripherally

280

G. Kempermann

induced factors such as IGF-1 or hormones complement the baseline control of
precursor cell activity. GABA- and glutamate-dependent mechanisms induce subsequent stages of neuronal development. Intracellularly, a series of transcription
factors steers the development of the new neurons. The details of the intermediate
signaling between extracellular events and transcription factor activity are still
largely unknown, and so is the complex patterns of interaction between the different
pathways. In the end, the precursor cells and their progeny seem to be able to integrate over a large number of signals to promote adult neurogenesis. Adult neurogenesis thereby offers the intriguing opportunity to break down a behavioral event
to the molecular level, to the ensuing cellular processes, and to functional consequences that again influence behavior.

References
Aimone JB, Wiles J, Gage FH (2006) Potential role for adult neurogenesis in the encoding of time
in new memories. Nat Neurosci 9:723–727.
Alahmed S, Herbert J (2008) Strain differences in proliferation of progenitor cells in the dentate
gyrus of the adult rat and the response to fluoxetine are dependent on corticosterone.
Neuroscience 157:677–682.
Becker S (2005) A computational principle for hippocampal learning and neurogenesis.
Hippocampus 15:722–738.
Becker S, Wojtowicz JM (2007) A model of hippocampal neurogenesis in memory and mood
disorders. Trends Cogn Sci 11:70–76.
Brandt MD, Jessberger S, Steiner B, Kronenberg G, Reuter K, Bick-Sander A, von der Behrens W,
Kempermann G (2003) Transient calretinin expression defines early postmitotic step of
neuronal differentiation in adult hippocampal neurogenesis of mice. Mol Cell Neurosci
24:603–613.
Brown ES, Rush AJ, McEwen BS (1999) Hippocampal remodeling and damage by corticosteroids: Implications for mood disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology 21:474–484.
Bruel-Jungerman E, Davis S, Rampon C, Laroche S (2006) Long-term potentiation enhances
neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 26:5888–5893.
Butz M, Lehmann K, Dammasch IE, Teuchert-Noodt G (2006) A theoretical network model to
analyse neurogenesis and synaptogenesis in the dentate gyrus. Neural Netw 19:1490–1505.
Butz M, Teuchert-Noodt G, Grafen K, van Ooyen A (2008) Inverse relationship between adult
hippocampal cell proliferation and synaptic rewiring in the dentate gyrus. Hippocampus
18:879–898.
Cameron HA, Gould E (1994) Adult neurogenesis is regulated by adrenal steroids in the dentate
gyrus. Neuroscience 61:203–209.
Cameron HA, McEwen BS, Gould E (1995) Regulation of adult neurogenesis by excitatory input
and NMDA receptor activation in the dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 15:4687–4692.
Cao L, Jiao X, Zuzga DS, Liu Y, Fong DM, Young D, During MJ (2004) VEGF links hippocampal
activity with neurogenesis, learning and memory. Nat Genet 36:827–835.
Dobrossy MD, Drapeau E, Aurousseau C, Le Moal M, Piazza PV, Abrous DN (2003) Differential
effects of learning on neurogenesis: Learning increases or decreases the number of newly born
cells depending on their birth date. Mol Psychiatry 8:974–982.
Duman RS (2004) Depression: A case of neuronal life and death? Biol Psychiatry 56:140–145.
Dupret D, Fabre A, Dobrossy MD, Panatier A, Rodriguez JJ, Lamarque S, Lemaire V, Oliet SH,
Piazza PV, Abrous DN (2007) Spatial learning depends on both the addition and removal of
new hippocampal neurons. PLoS Biol 5:e214.

11  Regulation of Adult Neurogenesis by Environment and Learning

281

Dupret D, Revest JM, Koehl M, Ichas F, De Giorgi F, Costet P, Abrous DN, Piazza PV (2008)
Spatial relational memory requires hippocampal adult neurogenesis. PLoS ONE 3:e1959.
Ehninger D, Kempermann G (2006) Paradoxical effects of learning the Morris water maze on
adult hippocampal neurogenesis in mice may be explained by a combination of stress and
physical activity. Genes Brain Behav 5:29–39.
Fabel K, Fabel K, Tam B, Kaufer D, Baiker A, Simmons N, Kuo CJ, Palmer TD (2003) VEGF is
necessary for exercise-induced adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Eur J Neurosci 18:2803–2812.
Fagiolini M, Fritschy JM, Low K, Mohler H, Rudolph U, Hensch TK (2004) Specific GABAA
circuits for visual cortical plasticity. Science 303:1681–1683.
Feng R, Rampon C, Tang YP, Shrom D, Jin J, Kyin M, Sopher B, Martin GM, Kim SH, Langdon
RB, Sisodia SS, Tsien JZ (2001) Deficient neurogenesis in forebrain-specific presenilin-1
knockout mice is associated with reduced clearance of hippocampal memory traces. Neuron
32:911–926.
Friedman WJ (2007) Comment on “Potential role for adult neurogenesis in the encoding of time
in new memories”. Hippocampus 17:503–504.
Ge S, Goh EL, Sailor KA, Kitabatake Y, Ming GL, Song H (2006) GABA regulates synaptic
integration of newly generated neurons in the adult brain. Nature 439:589–593.
Ge S, Yang CH, Hsu KS, Ming GL, Song H (2007) A critical period for enhanced synaptic plasticity in newly generated neurons of the adult brain. Neuron 54:559–566.
Gould E, Tanapat P (1999) Stress and hippocampal neurogenesis. Biol Psychiatry 46:1472–1479.
Gould E, Cameron HA, McEwen BS (1994) Blockade of NMDA receptors increases cell death
and birth in the developing rat dentate gyrus. J Comp Neurol 340:551–565.
Gould E, McEwen BS, Tanapat P, Galea LAM, Fuchs E (1997) Neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus
of the adult tree shrew is regulated by psychosocial stress and NMDA receptor activation.
J Neurosci 17:2492–2498.
Gould E, Beylin A, Tanapat P, Reeves A, Shors TJ (1999) Learning enhances adult neurogenesis
in the hippocampal formation. Nat Neurosci 2:260–265.
Greenough WT, Cohen NJ, Juraska JM (1999) New neurons in old brains: Learning to survive?
Nat Neurosci 2:203–205.
Hebb DO (1947) The effects of early experience on problem-solving at maturity. Am Psychol
2:306–307.
Heine VM, Maslam S, Zareno J, Joels M, Lucassen PJ (2004) Suppressed proliferation and apoptotic changes in the rat dentate gyrus after acute and chronic stress are reversible. Eur J
Neurosci 19:131–144.
Heine VM, Zareno J, Maslam S, Joels M, Lucassen PJ (2005) Chronic stress in the adult dentate
gyrus reduces cell proliferation near the vasculature and VEGF and FLK-1 protein expression.
Eur J Neurosci 21:1304–1314.
Hensch TK, Fagiolini M, Mataga N, Stryker MP, Baekkeskov S, Kash SF (1998) Local GABA
circuit control of experience-dependent plasticity in developing visual cortex. Science
282:1504–1508.
Holick KA, Lee DC, Hen R, Dulawa SC (2008) Behavioral effects of chronic fluoxetine in BALB/
cj mice do not require adult hippocampal neurogenesis or the serotonin 1a receptor.
Neuropsychopharmacology 33:406–417.
Jacobs BL, Praag H, Gage FH (2000) Adult brain neurogenesis and psychiatry: A novel theory of
depression. Mol Psychiatry 5:262–269.
Jessberger S, Kempermann G (2003) Adult-born hippocampal neurons mature into activitydependent responsiveness. Eur J Neurosci 18:2707–2712.
Kee N, Teixeira CM, Wang AH, Frankland PW (2007a) Preferential incorporation of adultgenerated granule cells into spatial memory networks in the dentate gyrus. Nat Neurosci
10:355–362.
Kee N, Teixeira CM, Wang AH, Frankland PW (2007b) Imaging activation of adult-generated
granule cells in spatial memory. Nat Protoc 2:3033–3044.
Kempermann G (2002) Why new neurons? Possible functions for adult hippocampal neurogen­
esis. J Neurosci 22:635–638.

282

G. Kempermann

Kempermann G (2008) The neurogenic reserve hypothesis: What is adult hippocampal neurogenesis
good for? Trends Neurosci 31:163–169.
Kempermann G, Gage FH (1999) Experience-dependent regulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis: Effects of long-term stimulation and stimulus withdrawal. Hippocampus
9:321–332.
Kempermann G, Gage FH (2002a) Genetic determinants of adult hippocampal neurogenesis correlate with acquisition, but not probe trial performance in the water maze task. Eur J Neurosci
16:129–136.
Kempermann G, Gage FH (2002b) Genetic influence on phenotypic differentiation in adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Brain Res Dev Brain Res 134:1–12.
Kempermann G, Kronenberg G (2003) Depressed new neurons? Adult hippocampal neurogenesis
and a cellular plasticity hypothesis of major depression. Biol Psychiatry 54:499–503.
Kempermann G, Kuhn HG, Gage FH (1997a) Genetic influence on neurogenesis in the dentate
gyrus of adult mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:10409–10414.
Kempermann G, Kuhn HG, Gage FH (1997b) More hippocampal neurons in adult mice living in
an enriched environment. Nature 386:493–495.
Kempermann G, Brandon EP, Gage FH (1998a) Environmental stimulation of 129/SvJ mice
causes increased cell proliferation and neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus. Curr Biol
8:939–942.
Kempermann G, Kuhn HG, Gage FH (1998b) Experience-induced neurogenesis in the senescent
dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 18:3206–3212.
Kempermann G, Gast D, Gage FH (2002) Neuroplasticity in old age: Sustained fivefold induction of
hippocampal neurogenesis by long-term environmental enrichment. Ann Neurol 52:135–143.
Kempermann G, Chesler EJ, Lu L, Williams RW, Gage FH (2006) Natural variation and genetic
covariance in adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:780–785.
Koehl M, Meerlo P, Gonzales D, Rontal A, Turek FW, Abrous DN (2008) Exercise-induced promotion of hippocampal cell proliferation requires beta-endorphin. FASEB J 22:2253–2262.
Kronenberg G, Reuter K, Steiner B, Brandt MD, Jessberger S, Yamaguchi M, Kempermann G
(2003) Subpopulations of proliferating cells of the adult hippocampus respond differently to
physiologic neurogenic stimuli. J Comp Neurol 467:455–463.
Kronenberg G, Bick-Sander A, Bunk E, Wolf C, Ehninger D, Kempermann G (2006) Physical
exercise prevents age-related decline in precursor cell activity in the mouse dentate gyrus.
Neurobiol Aging 27:1505–1513.
Magavi SS, Mitchell BD, Szentirmai O, Carter BS, Macklis JD (2005) Adult-born and preexisting
olfactory granule neurons undergo distinct experience-dependent modifications of their olfactory responses in vivo. J Neurosci 25:10729–10739.
Mak GK, Enwere EK, Gregg C, Pakarainen T, Poutanen M, Huhtaniemi I, Weiss S (2007) Male
pheromone-stimulated neurogenesis in the adult female brain: Possible role in mating behavior.
Nat Neurosci 10:1003–1011.
Marashi V, Barnekow A, Ossendorf E, Sachser N (2003) Effects of different forms of environmental
enrichment on behavioral, endocrinological, and immunological parameters in male mice.
Horm Behav 43:281–292.
Matas-Rico E, Garcia-Diaz B, Llebrez-Zayas P, Lopez-Barroso D, Santin L, Pedraza C, SmithFernandez A, Fernandez-Llebrez P, Tellez T, Redondo M, Chun J, De Fonseca FR, EstivillTorrus G (2008) Deletion of lysophosphatidic acid receptor LPA1 reduces neurogenesis in the
mouse dentate gyrus. Mol Cell Neurosci 39:342–355.
Mohammed AH, Henriksson BG, Soderstrom S, Ebendal T, Olsson T, Seckl JR (1993)
Environmental influences on the central nervous system and their implications for the aging
rat. Behav Brain Res 57:183–191.
Nacher J, McEwen BS (2006) The role of N-methyl-d-asparate receptors in neurogenesis.
Hippocampus 16:267–270.
Nacher J, Alonso-Llosa G, Rosell DR, McEwen BS (2003) NMDA receptor antagonist treatment
increases the production of new neurons in the aged rat hippocampus. Neurobiol Aging
24:273–284.

11  Regulation of Adult Neurogenesis by Environment and Learning

283

Okuyama N, Takagi N, Kawai T, Miyake-Takagi K, Takeo S (2004) Phosphorylation of
extracellular-regulating kinase in NMDA receptor antagonist-induced newly generated
neurons in the adult rat dentate gyrus. J Neurochem 88:717–725.
Petersen A, Wortwein G, Gruber SH, Mathe AA (2008) Escitalopram reduces increased
­hippocampal cytogenesis in a genetic rat depression model. Neurosci Lett 436:305–308.
Petrus DS, Fabel K, Kronenberg G, Winter C, Steiner B, Kempermann G (2009) NMDA and
benzodiazepine receptors have synergistic and antagonistic effects on precursor cells in adult
hippocampal neurogenesis. Eur J Neurosci 29(2):244–252.
Rochefort C, Gheusi G, Vincent JD, Lledo PM (2002) Enriched odor exposure increases the number of newborn neurons in the adult olfactory bulb and improves odor memory. J Neurosci
22:2679–2689.
Rosenzweig MR, Bennett EL (1996) Psychobiology of plasticity: Effects of training and experience on brain and behavior. Behav Brain Res 78:57–65.
Rossi C, Angelucci A, Costantin L, Braschi C, Mazzantini M, Babbini F, Fabbri ME, Tessarollo L,
Maffei L, Berardi N, Caleo M (2006) Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is required
for the enhancement of hippocampal neurogenesis following environmental enrichment. Eur J
Neurosci 24:1850–1856.
Sahay A, Hen R (2007) Adult hippocampal neurogenesis in depression. Nat Neurosci
10:1110–1115.
Santarelli L, Saxe M, Gross C, Surget A, Battaglia F, Dulawa S, Weisstaub N, Lee J, Duman R,
Arancio O, Belzung C, Hen R (2003) Requirement of hippocampal neurogenesis for the
behavioral effects of antidepressants. Science 301:805–809.
Saxe MD, Battaglia F, Wang JW, Malleret G, David DJ, Monckton JE, Garcia AD, Sofroniew MV,
Kandel ER, Santarelli L, Hen R, Drew MR (2006) Ablation of hippocampal neurogenesis
impairs contextual fear conditioning and synaptic plasticity in the dentate gyrus. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 103:17501–17506.
Saxe MD, Malleret G, Vronskaya S, Mendez I, Garcia AD, Sofroniew MV, Kandel ER, Hen R
(2007) Paradoxical influence of hippocampal neurogenesis on working memory. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 104:4642–4646.
Schmidt-Hieber C, Jonas P, Bischofberger J (2004) Enhanced synaptic plasticity in newly generated granule cells of the adult hippocampus. Nature 429:184–187.
Shors TJ, Miesegaes G, Beylin A, Zhao M, Rydel T, Gould E (2001) Neurogenesis in the adult is
involved in the formation of trace memories. Nature 410:372–376.
Shors TJ, Townsend DA, Zhao M, Kozorovitskiy Y, Gould E (2002) Neurogenesis may relate to
some but not all types of hippocampal-dependent learning. Hippocampus 12:578–584.
Snyder JS, Hong NS, McDonald RJ, Wojtowicz JM (2005) A role for adult neurogenesis in spatial
long-term memory. Neuroscience 130:843–852.
Steiner B, Zurborg S, Horster H, Fabel K, Kempermann G (2008) Differential 24 h responsiveness
of prox1-expressing precursor cells in adult hippocampal neurogenesis to physical activity,
environmental enrichment, and kainic acid-induced seizures. Neuroscience 154:521–529.
Stranahan AM, Khalil D, Gould E (2006) Social isolation delays the positive effects of running
on adult neurogenesis. Nat Neurosci 9:526–533.
Tashiro A, Sandler VM, Toni N, Zhao C, Gage FH (2006) NMDA-receptor-mediated, cell-specific
integration of new neurons in adult dentate gyrus. Nature 442:929–933.
Tashiro A, Makino H, Gage FH (2007) Experience-specific functional modification of the dentate
gyrus through adult neurogenesis: A critical period during an immature stage. J Neurosci
27:3252–3259.
Tozuka Y, Fukuda S, Namba T, Seki T, Hisatsune T (2005) GABAergic excitation promotes neuronal differentiation in adult hippocampal progenitor cells. Neuron 47:803–815.
Trejo JL, Carro E, Torres-Aleman I (2001) Circulating insulin-like growth factor I mediates
exercise-induced increases in the number of new neurons in the adult hippocampus. J Neurosci
21:1628–1634.
Van Praag H, Kempermann G, Gage FH (1999) Running increases cell proliferation and neurogenesis in the adult mouse dentate gyrus. Nat Neurosci 2:266–270.

284

G. Kempermann

van Praag H, Schinder AF, Christie BR, Toni N, Palmer TD, Gage FH (2002) Functional
­neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus. Nature 415:1030–1034.
Walsh RN, Cummins RA (1975) Mechanisms mediating the production of environmentally
induced brain changes. Psychol Bull 82:986–1000.
Wang S, Scott BW, Wojtowicz JM (2000) Heterogeneous properties of dentate granule neurons in
the adult rat. J Neurobiol 42:248–257.
Wang LP, Kempermann G, Kettenmann H (2005) A subpopulation of precursor cells in the mouse
dentate gyrus receives synaptic GABAergic input. Mol Cell Neurosci 29:181–189.
Winocur G, Wojtowicz JM, Sekeres M, Snyder JS, Wang S (2006) Inhibition of neurogenesis
interferes with hippocampus-dependent memory function. Hippocampus 16:296–304.
Wiskott L, Rasch MJ, Kempermann G (2006) A functional hypothesis for adult hippocampal
neurogenesis: Avoidance of catastrophic interference in the dentate gyrus. Hippocampus
16:329–343.

Part V

Adult Neurogenesis in the Olfactory Bulb

Chapter 12

Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic
Germinal Niches
Zaman Mirzadeh, Young-Goo Han, José Manuel García-Verdugo,
and Arturo Alvarez-Buylla

The adult mammalian brain is perhaps the most complex biological system under
scientific study. Yet for all of its complexity, the brain develops from a simple epithelium. Throughout development, most neurons and macroglia are derived from
embryonic neural stem cells that remain part of this neuroepithelium lining the brain
ventricles. However, it is thought that neural stem cells in the adult brain, which are
displaced to the subventricular zone of the lateral ventricle and the subgranular zone
of the hippocampus, may have lost their epithelial properties. This chapter explores
the epithelial organization of cells lining the ventricles in the adult rodent brain and
reveals that a mixed neuroepithelium persists in the adult that contains neural stem
cells in addition to differentiated, non-dividing ependymal cells.

12.1 Epithelia, Neuroepithelial Cells, and Radial Glia
Epithelia are sheets of tissue that line the cavities and surfaces of organs throughout
the body. Epithelial sheets are cell-rich and have only a thin layer of extracellular
matrix, called the basal lamina, deposited beneath the epithelial sheet. Within the
sheet, epithelial cells have distinct apical and basal membranes specialized for
diverse functions (Alberts et al., 1994). Characteristic protein and lipid composition

Z. Mirzadeh, Y.-G. Han, and A. Alvarez-Buylla (*)
Department of Neurosurgery, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
and
Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
University of California, San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, Room HSW-1201,
Campus Box 0525, San Francisco, CA 94143-0525, USA
e-mail: abuylla@stemcell.ucsf.edu
J.M. García-Verdugo
Laboratorio de Morfología Celular, Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe,
Valencia, Spain
and
CIBERNED, Spain
T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_12, © Springer 2011

287

288

Z. Mirzadeh et al.

distinguish the apical and basal membranes, which are delimited by intercellular
junctional complexes (Martin-Belmonte and Mostov, 2008). These complexes
consist of adherens and tight junctions that recruit molecules involved in regulating
apical–basal polarity of the epithelium. Although less well understood, epithelial
cells also have planar polarity, which is the orientation of the cell with respect to
the epithelial plane (orthogonal to the apical–basal axis) (Zallen, 2007; Simons and
Mlodzik, 2008; Wu and Mlodzik, 2009). Another property of epithelia is high
tensile strength, derived from cytoskeletal filaments (i.e. actin and intermediate
filaments) expressed by cells within the sheet that interconnect across the epithelium at junctional complexes (Alberts et al., 1994). The expression of cytoskeletal
filaments and intercellular junctional complexes, and apical–basal and planar polarity
are common properties of epithelial cells, even though these cells can have different
shapes and be organized into single or multiple cell layers.
The brain develops from a pseudostratified columnar epithelium. Early in development, this flat neuroepithelium (the neural plate) bends at the midline of the
embryo and the lateral ridges fold over and fuse, forming an epithelial tube
called the neural tube (Schoenwolf and Smith, 2000; Colas and Schoenwolf, 2001).
A single layer of neuroepithelial (NE) cells forms the walls of the neural tube, each
cell spanning from the lumen of the tube (prospective brain ventricle) at its apical
membrane to the outer surface of the tube (prospective brain pia) at its basal
membrane. The stratified appearance (‘pseudostratified’) of NE cells is a result of
cell-cycle dependent to-and-fro movements of their nuclei, called interkinetic
nuclear migration, along the apical–basal axis (Sauer, 1935; Misson et al., 1988;
Noctor et al., 2001). The nucleus migrates to the basal membrane to replicate its
DNA, and then migrates back to the apical luminal surface to undergo mitosis. NE
cells also have other indicators of apical–basal polarity, such as the organization of
their apical and basal membranes (Wodarz and Huttner, 2003; Gotz and Huttner,
2005). The apical membrane is enriched in prominin-1 (CD133) (Weigmann et al.,
1997), while the basal membrane localizes integrin a6 (Wodarz and Huttner, 2003),
a transmembrane receptor that binds to the basal lamina. In addition, NE cells have
adherens and tight junctions at the interface between apical and basal sides (AakuSaraste et al., 1996; Chenn et al., 1998). Knocking out AF-6 (also called afadin), a
multi-domain scaffold protein that is a component of these junctional complexes,
has been shown to disrupt the polarization of neuroepithelial cells (Ikeda et  al.,
1999; Zhadanov et al., 1999; Ooshio et al., 2007). Interestingly, although the apical–
basal polarity of NE cells is maintained during formation of the neural tube
(Schoenwolf and Smith, 2000; Colas and Schoenwolf, 2001), the composition of
NE cell junctional complexes is dynamic. NE cell adherens junctions lose
E-cadherin expression and increase N-cadherin expression during neural tube
closure (Hatta et al., 1987; Takeichi, 1995). Occludin, a component of tight junctions, is also lost during this time, as are functional tight junctions (Aaku-Saraste
et al., 1996). It has been suggested that these changes reflect a remodeling of the
neuroepithelium that is necessary for neurogenesis to occur.
Neurogenesis in the mouse forebrain begins at E10-E11 (Caviness et  al., 1995),
resulting in the production of basally migrating neuroblasts that thicken the neural tube

12  Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic Germinal Niches

289

wall and transform it into multilayered structure (Huttner and Kosodo, 2005). In the
course of this transformation, NE cells are replaced by a distinct, but related, progenitor
cell type called the radial glial cell. These cells are the principal neuronal progenitors of
the embryonic forebrain (Malatesta et  al., 2000; Miyata et  al., 2001; Noctor et  al.,
2001; Tamamaki et al., 2001; Anthony et al., 2004). Radial glia keep their cell body
at the luminal side of the thickening neural tube in a pseudostratified layer called
the ventricular zone (VZ) (The Boulder Committee, 1970). The stratified appearance
of the VZ is due to interkinetic nuclear migration of radial glial cells (Misson et al.,
1988; Noctor et al., 2001), a behavior very similar to that of NE cells. From their cell
body in the VZ, radial glia extend a long, radially-oriented basal process that contacts
the pial basal lamina (Halfter et al., 2002; Haubst et al., 2006), and a short apical
process that contacts the neural tube lumen. The radial process forms additional
en-passant contacts with blood vessel basal lamina as it courses through the neuronal
layers towards the pia (Misson et al., 1988; Noctor et al., 2001). Radial glia, therefore,
maintain the topology of NE cells (Astrom and Webster, 1991). It is thought that signals
arising from both apical and basal poles of these cells are essential for proper
neurogenesis [e.g. apical: (Bittman et al., 1997; Nadarajah et al., 1997; Kosodo et al.,
2004; Weissman et al., 2004), e.g. basal: (Halfter et al., 2002; Haubst et al., 2006)].
In addition to maintained apical and basal contacts, radial glia share other epithelial
characteristics with NE cells such as apical membrane specializations: extension of
the primary cilium from the apical surface, which is associated to the basal body and
centriole directly beneath the apical surface (discussed below) (Chenn et al., 1998;
Tramontin et al., 2003), apical expression of prominin-1 (CD133) (Weigmann et al.,
1997), and apical membrane concentration of ASIP/Par-3, Par-6, aPKC (Manabe et al.,
2002; Kosodo et al., 2004; Afonso and Henrique, 2006; Imai et al., 2006; von Trotha
et al., 2006; Costa et al., 2008), and Cdc42 (Cappello et al., 2006), cytoplasmic proteins that are known regulators of apical–basal polarity (Munro, 2006; MartinBelmonte and Mostov, 2008).
Par-3, Par-6, and aPKC form a polarity complex at the apical end of NE and
radial glial cells. Apically localized expression of these proteins decreases during
cortical development concomitant with the decline in radial glial progenitor numbers
and the increase in basally located intermediate progenitors. Intermediate progenitors
are transit-amplifying cells that expand the precursor pool in the developing subventricular zone (SVZ) prior to neuronal differentiation. Interestingly, recent evidence
shows that Par3 knockdown in radial glia results in early cell cycle exit and neuronal
differentiation, while overexpression of Par proteins promotes symmetric proliferative divisions of radial glial progenitors (Costa et  al., 2008). Consistently,
deletion in radial glia of cdc42, a known activator of the par complex (Lin et al.,
2000; Hutterer et al., 2004; Etienne-Manneville et al., 2005), results in loss of apical
Par proteins and adherens junctions leading to early loss of radial glia and increase
in intermediate progenitors (Cappello et al., 2006). Perhaps a more interesting result
comes from conditional ablation of aPKC-l, one of two isoforms of aPKC, in radial
glial progenitors slightly later in development (~E15.5). Radial glia in these mutants
lose apical adherens junctions and ventricular contacts yet undergo apparently
normal neurogenesis (Imai et al., 2006). The milder phenotype in these mutants may

290

Z. Mirzadeh et al.

be partially explained by the later inactivation of the polarity complex. However,
one tantalizing possibility suggested by these studies altogether is that while apical–
basal polarity is essential for the function of radial glia as primary progenitors,
maintenance of this polarity does not absolutely require apical adherens junctions or
ventricular contact.
As in NE cells, junctional complexes including adherens junctions (Mollgard
et al., 1987; Chenn et al., 1998; Kosodo et al., 2004) delimit the apical and basolateral membranes of radial glia. Surprisingly, the integrity of radial glial adherens
junctions was recently shown to require numb, a molecule well studied for its roles
in neuronal cell fate determination (Kuo et  al., 2006; Rasin et  al., 2007). Loss of
Numb and Numb-like in radial glia disrupts proper basolateral insertion of cadherins
and results in abnormal adherens junctions and polarity (Rasin et al., 2007).
Planar polarity is an epithelial property that has been studied in NE cells early
in neural tube development. Before the neural tube closes, NE cells undergo mediolateral intercalation within the plane of the neural plate (Schoenwolf and Alvarez,
1989). Net cell movement is towards the midline. This polarized rearrangement of
cells, called convergent extension, simultaneously narrows and elongates the neural
plate, and brings together the elevating lateral folds that will fuse to form the
neural tube (Copp et al., 2003; Wallingford, 2006). Failure of this planar polarized
movement of NE cells results in open neural tube defects (Greene et  al., 1998;
Wallingford et al., 2000; Wallingford and Harland, 2002; Murdoch et al., 2003).
In contrast to the early neuroepithelium, planar polarized behavior of radial glial
cells has not been demonstrated. However, recent evidence shows that the large
majority of radial glial mitoses in the cortical VZ occur with a vertical cleavage
plane (perpendicular to the ventricular surface) (Noctor et  al., 2008), suggesting
that the mitotic spindle is oriented within the epithelial plane of the VZ. Although
it has been previously suggested that such cleavage planes produce symmetric
divisions, it is now understood that vertical or near vertical cleavages are capable
of producing asymmetric divisions (Huttner and Brand, 1997; Huttner and Kosodo,
2005). This may occur through asymmetric inheritance of the apical membrane
(Kosodo et  al., 2004) or a fate-determining molecule, such as the EGF receptor
(Sun et al., 2005). The prevalence of vertical cleavage planes indicates that asymmetric distribution of these factors would occur with an orientation orthogonal to
the apical–basal axis. It will be interesting to determine whether radial glia in the
VZ have planar polarity that is predictive of this asymmetric distribution.
In sum, NE and radial glial cells are epithelial cells with shared apical–basal polarity,
evident in the organization of their apical and basolateral membranes separated by
junctional complexes. Other epithelial characteristics shared by NE cells and radial
glia include expression of the intermediate filament protein nestin (Hockfield and
McKay, 1985; Frederiksen and McKay, 1988) and the intermediate filament associated
protein RC2 (Misson et al., 1988). However, despite the shared epithelial characteristics, radial glia are distinct from NE cells. Specifically, radial glia acquire several
astroglial properties: glycogen granules (Gadisseux and Evrard, 1985), and the expression of the intermediate filament protein vimentin (Pixley and De Vellis, 1984), the
astrocyte-specific glutamate transporter GLAST (Shibata et  al., 1997), brain lipid
binding protein (BLBP) (Feng and Heintz, 1995), tenascin-C (Peretto et al., 2005), and

12  Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic Germinal Niches

291

in primates (Levitt and Rakic, 1980) and some murine radial glia (Rickmann et al.,
1987), the intermediate filament protein and astrocyte marker GFAP (Glial Fibrillary
Acidic Protein). It has been suggested that these molecular changes are related to the
function of radial glia as guides for neuronal migration (Rakic, 1972; Hatten, 1999;
Malatesta et al., 2003). Radial glia and NE cells are therefore distinct cell types, but
these embryonic neural stem cells are both epithelial cells that remain part of an epithelium lining the brain ventricles throughout development.

12.2 Historical Perspective on Adult Neurogenesis
Shortly after birth in mammals, radial glia transform into parenchymal astrocytes
(Schmechel and Rakic, 1979; Voigt, 1989) and ependymal cells (discussed below)
(Spassky et al., 2005) and little remains of their unique morphology and behavior.
The VZ is replaced by a simple ependymal epithelium. This stark transformation of
the brain ventricular walls in part fueled the notion that neurogenesis was a prenatal
or early postnatal phenomenon. In addition, primate studies, where adult neurogenesis may be poorly represented (Rakic, 1985), supported the notion that the adult
brain was too complex for the useful integration of new neurons. However, studies
in the 1960s started to challenge this notion. A series of papers by Joseph Altman
and colleagues suggested that specific regions in the adult rodent brain did generate
new neurons, which could be labeled by [3H]-thymidine (Altman, 1962, 1963,
1967, 1969; Altman and Das, 1965). A decade later, electron microscopy studies of
[3H]-thymidine labeled neurons added more support to the controversial claim of
adult neurogenesis (Kaplan and Hinds, 1977). Finally, experiments in songbirds
would provide definitive evidence that neurons generated in the adult did functionally integrate into existing circuits. Goldman and Nottebohm showed that new
neurons generated in the adult canary brain could be labeled with [3H]-thymidine
(Goldman and Nottebohm, 1983). Paton and Nottebohm showed that new neurons,
labeled with [3H]-thymidine, could be impaled with microelectrodes and (1) exhibited
action potentials, (2) responded to auditory stimuli, and (3) could be filled with
peroxidase to reveal typical dendritic and axonal morphology (Paton and Nottebohm,
1984; Nottebohm, 2004). Several studies have since shown that the adult rodent
brain contains two major proliferative regions, the lateral wall of the lateral ventricle
(LV) and the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus (Kaplan and Bell, 1983; Reynolds
and Weiss, 1992; Lois and Alvarez-Buylla, 1993; Alvarez-Buylla and GarciaVerdugo, 2002; van Praag et al., 2002; Zhao et al., 2008). With adult neurogenesis
becoming a more widely accepted phenomenon, the search was on for the adult
neural stem cells in vivo, the primary progenitors from which new neurons in the
adult brain are derived. To date, it has been shown that in adult songbirds (AlvarezBuylla et  al., 1990), lizards (Garcia-Verdugo et  al., 2002), turtles (Russo et  al.,
2004), and fish (Zupanc, 2006), neurogenic radial glia are retained as adult
primary progenitors for the continual generation of new neurons and glial cells.
However, in mammals, the adult neural stem cells appear to have an astroglial
phenotype (discussed below) (Doetsch et al., 1999b; Seri et al., 2001).

292

Z. Mirzadeh et al.

12.3 Identification of the Adult Mammalian Neural Stem Cell
In contrast to neural stem cells (neuroepithelial cells and radial glia) of the embryonic mammalian brain, neural stem cells in the adult are not considered to be part
of an epithelium. Adult neural stem cells are displaced from the ventricular lining
to either the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the LV (Alvarez-Buylla and GarciaVerdugo, 2002) or the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the hippocampal dentate gyrus
(Zhao et al., 2008). Here we will review the epithelial properties, such as apical–
basal polarity, of adult neural stem cells in the SVZ. A similar analysis has not been
conducted for the progenitors in the adult hippocampal SGZ, although these cells
have been studied extensively (Altman and Bayer, 1990; Eves et al., 1992; Palmer
et al., 2000; Pleasure et al., 2000; Alvarez-Buylla et al., 2002; Seaberg and van der
Kooy, 2002; Seri and Alvarez-Buylla, 2002; Filippov et  al., 2003; Fukuda et  al.,
2003; Seri et al., 2004; Zhao et al., 2008).
The first evidence that the walls of the adult lateral ventricle retained neural stem
cells came from in vitro studies in which dissociated cells were cultured in the presence of EGF and FGF (Reynolds and Weiss, 1992; Morshead et al., 1994). Under
these conditions, some cells proliferated to form free-floating balls of cells called
neurospheres. Neurospheres could be passaged and differentiated into neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes, thereby exhibiting self-renewal and multipotency. These
criteria, which are used to define stem cells in other systems, have been used to define
the adult NSC in  vitro (Tropepe et  al., 1999; Geschwind et  al., 2001; Capela and
Temple, 2002). However, the walls of the LV, the lateral wall in particular, contain at
least four different cell types identified by morphology, ultrastructure, and molecular
markers (Fig. 12.1) (Doetsch et al., 1997). For this reason, and the concern that culturing
cells may alter their potential (Doetsch et al., 2002; Gabay et al., 2003), determining
the identity of the adult neural stem cell required in vivo analysis.
The walls of the adult LV are lined by a simple epithelium of multiciliated
ependymal (Type E) cells. Although these cells have been suggested to be the stem
cells (Johansson et al., 1999), further analysis has shown that they do not divide in
the adult brain (Spassky et al., 2005) and do not act as progenitors in vitro (Chiasson
et  al., 1999; Doetsch et  al., 1999b). Beneath the ependymal lining lies the subependymal or subventricular zone, occupied by three additional cell types (Types
A, B, and C cells), described by immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy
(Doetsch et al., 1997). Type A cells are neuroblasts that have a migratory morphology and express the markers typical of young neurons: Tuj1, Dcx, and PSANCAM. These cells migrate in chains, found throughout the lateral wall of the LV
(Doetsch and Alvarez-Buylla, 1996), that coalesce in the anterior SVZ to form the
rostral migratory stream (RMS) to the olfactory bulb (OB) (Luskin, 1993; Lois and
Alvarez-Buylla, 1994). Once they have reached their final destination in the OB,
the neuroblasts mature into different subtypes of OB interneurons (Petreanu and
Alvarez-Buylla, 2002; Carleton et al., 2003; Hack et al., 2005; Kohwi et al., 2005,
2007; Kelsch et  al., 2007; Merkle et  al., 2007). Chains of migrating A cells are
ensheathed by glial tubes formed by astrocytic processes (Jankovski and Sotelo,

12  Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic Germinal Niches

293

Fig.  12.1  Characterization of SVZ cell types by serial ultrathin section reconstruction at the
electron microscope. The ultramicrograph to the left illustrates the complexity of the SVZ. While
this initial work allowed the identification of the different cell types, it did not show any obvious
epithelial organization of the progenitors. Micrograph montages of the SVZ (left) were studied
and cell types were identified and traced (for original color coding see: Doetsch et al., 1997). On
the right, cell types were named A–E: Ependymal (E) cells (light gray) line the lateral ventricle.
Beneath the layer of E cells, three cell types (B, C, A) are located in the SVZ. Type B cells (B)
are adult neural stem cells that generate migratory neuroblasts (A) through an intermediate
progenitor (C cell). Type B cells form glial tubes that ensheath chains of migrating A cells
destined for the olfactory bulb

1996; Lois et al., 1996; Peretto et al., 1997), some of which belong to Type B cells.
The astrocytic properties of B cells include GFAP expression, abundant intermediate
filaments, specialized contact with blood vessels, and glycogen granules. B cells
can be further subtyped into type B1 and B2 cells. While both of these subtypes
have the typical ultrastructure of astrocytes, B1 cells have lighter cytoplasm, a
larger cell body, and less condensed chromatin than B2 cells. In addition, B1 cells
are located adjacent to E cells with processes that form a lamina separating E cells
from A cells; B2 cells are located deeper in the parenchyma at the SVZ-striatal
interface. Type C cells are similar in size to B cells but have a simpler morphology,
contain deeply invaginated nuclei, no intermediate filaments, and express the
markers Mash1 (Parras et al., 2004) and Dlx2 (Doetsch et al., 2002). A subpopulation of C cells also expresses Olig2 (Menn et al., 2006). Of these three cell types,
B and C cells can act as stem cells in vitro and give rise to large colonies of A cells
(Lim and Alvarez-Buylla, 1999; Doetsch et al., 2002), whereas A cells themselves
have limited self-renewal (Lim and Alvarez-Buylla, 1999).

294

Z. Mirzadeh et al.

The adult neural stem cell was identified in vivo by its ability to generate the
other SVZ cell types. First, intracranial infusion of cytosine arabinoside (Ara-C), a
nucleoside analog chemotherapeutic drug, was used to deplete the SVZ of rapidly
dividing cells. This ablated C and A cells but not ependymal cells or the more
slowly-dividing B cells. Surprisingly, this revealed that Type B cells (SVZ astrocytes)
function as primary progenitors in the regeneration of the SVZ; they divide to
generate C cells, which in turn divide to generate A cells (Doetsch et al., 1999b).
In addition, specific labeling of SVZ astrocytes by an avian retrovirus resulted in
the generation of labeled neurons that migrated to and integrated in the OB, again
through a C cell intermediate. Much like intermediate progenitors of the embryonic
SVZ (Haubensak et al., 2004; Noctor et al., 2004, 2007), it appears that C cells are
a transit-amplifying cell type that expands the progenitor pool that ultimately
produces neuroblasts. More recent work in transgenic mice, tracing the fate of
(Garcia et al., 2004), or ablating (Imura et al., 2003), GFAP+ SVZ astrocytes, has
confirmed the finding that Type B cells are the primary progenitors for adult
neurogenesis from the SVZ. Type B cells were also recently shown to produce
oligodendrocyte progenitors that migrate to, and generate oligodendrocytes in, the
corpus callosum (Menn et al., 2006). While the adult SVZ neurogenic niche was
initially described as residing along the anterior lateral wall of the LV (Luskin,
1993), recent studies have shown that the neurogenic niche is far more extensive,
including the RMS (Bonfanti et al., 1997; Pencea et al., 2001; Gritti et al., 2002;
Liu and Martin, 2003; Hack et al., 2005; Merkle et al., 2007) and more posterior
regions of the lateral wall (Merkle et al., 2007), and also the dorsal or pallial wall
of the LV (Kohwi et al., 2007; Merkle et al., 2007; Ventura and Goldman, 2007),
the anterior medial wall of the LV (Doetsch et al., 1999b), and the subcallosal zone
(Seri et al., 2006). Unlike in the embryo, neural stem cells in these regions occupy
a subventricular or subependymal position, displaced from the ventricle by postnatal
development of ependymal cells.

12.4 The Ependymal Epithelium
A bona fide epithelium, with both apical–basal and planar polarity, does remain
lining the ventricles in the adult brain. This epithelium consists of a single layer of
multi-ciliated ependymal cells, which are postmitotic (Spassky et al., 2005). The
ependyma plays an important role as a protective barrier at the brain–cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) interface (Del Bigio, 1995). Ependymal cells have been conceived as a
filtration system, transporting ions, small molecules, and fluid between the brain
and CSF (Kuchler et al., 1994; Bruni, 1998). In addition, they have the enzymatic
and structural characteristics necessary for scavenging and detoxifying various
substances in the CSF (Del Bigio, 1995). Monoamine oxidase enzymes, which
metabolize biogenic amines, are expressed in ependymal cells and suggest that the
ependyma functions as an amine-barrier system (Williams et al., 1979; Saura et al.,
1994). Structurally, ependymal cells are specialized for the propulsion of CSF,
which helps redistribute and dilute local concentrations of toxins and metabolites

12  Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic Germinal Niches

295

(Del Bigio, 1995). In mice, ependymal cells extend 30–70 motile (9+2) cilia from
their apical surface into the ventricles (Bruni, 1998). Through coordinated, planarpolarized beating of these cilia across the epithelium, ependymal cells generate
directed cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow in the ventricles (Worthington and Cathcart,
1963; Ibanez-Tallon et  al., 2004; Sawamoto et  al., 2006) and help maintain CSF
homeostasis (Cathcart and Worthington, 1964).
Although functional assays that measure the orientation of fluid flow across the
epithelium (Ibanez-Tallon et al., 2004; Sawamoto et al., 2006) have for a long time
demonstrated the planar polarity of ependymal cells, until recently there were no
anatomical correlates within these cells indicative of their planar polarity. In other
multiciliated epithelia, such as the lining of the quail oviduct (Boisvieux-Ulrich
et al., 1985), the mammalian respiratory tract (Satir and Dirksen, 1985), or the
Xenopus larval skin (Mitchell et al., 2007), the basal foot, an accessory structure of
the basal body (discussed below), points in the direction of the ciliary beat. Recently,
en face ultrastructural analysis of the ependymal epithelium showed that the basal
foot of ependymal cell basal bodies is also aligned with the direction of the ciliary
beat and CSF flow (Mirzadeh et al., 2010). Additionally, this study showed that
ependymal cells have an indicator of planar polarity not described in other multiciliated epithelia. Ependymal cell basal bodies are clustered in a well circumscribed
patch comprising ~20% apical surface. Within neighboring ependymal cells, the
basal body patch is displaced to the same “downstream” side of the cell with respect
to CSF flow. Altogether, ependymal cells therefore have two types of planar polarity:
rotational, based on the direction of the basal foot as it projects from the basal body;
and translational, based on the position of the basal body patch on the apical surface
(Mirzadeh et al., 2010).
Recent studies have shown that both ependymal cells (Spassky et al., 2005) and
SVZ Type B cells (Merkle et al., 2004) are derived from radial glia (discussed
below), providing evidence of continuity between the embryonic and adult germinal
niches. Furthermore, there is evidence that the epithelial organization of ependymal
cells, including their apical–basal polarity and their planar polarity, is inherited
from their radial glial progenitors. In radial glia undergoing differentiation into
ependymal cells, ultrastructural analyses reveal the presence of deuterosomes,
electron-dense spheres of material in the supranuclear or apical compartment of the
cell, used to build multiple basal bodies (Spassky et al., 2005; Dawe et al., 2007).
The nascent basal bodies then migrate to the apical surface of the formerly uniciliated (9 + 0) radial glial cell, where they nucleate multiple (9 + 2) cilia (Jose
Manuel García-Verdugo, personal communication). Remarkably, the planar polarity
of ependymal cells also appears to be inherited from their radial glial progenitors.
Analogous to the translational polarity of the basal body patch observed in ependymal
cells, the single basal body at the base of the primary cilium in radial glia is displaced
to the “downstream” side of the apical surface in a manner predictive of prospective
ependymal polarity (Mirzadeh et al., 2010). In conditional mutants lacking radial
glial primary cilia, subsequent translational polarity of the ependymal basal body
patch is disrupted. Interestingly, in a slightly different conditional mutant where
cilia are ablated after radial glial transformation into ependymal cells (radial glia
retain primary cilia but ependymal cells lack motile cilia), translational polarity is

296

Z. Mirzadeh et al.

relatively well preserved but rotational polarity is disrupted. Altogether, these studies
reveal that while ependymal cell translational polarity is inherited from their radial
glial progenitors and is regulated by primary cilia, rotational polarity is determined
by ependymal motile cilia (Mirzadeh et al., 2010).
Evidence from other multiciliated epithelia, such as the Xenopus larval skin
(Twitty, 1928; Tung and Tung, 1940) or the quail oviduct (Boisvieux-Ulrich and

Fig. 12.2  Axonemal structure of cilia and basal bodies. (a) Cross-section of (9 + 2) and (9 + 0)
axonemes. (9 + 2) axonemes have a ring of 9 doublet microtubules (A and B tubules) surrounding
2 central singlet microtubules. (9 + 0) axonemes lack the central pair of microtubules. (9 + 2)
axonemes also have associated molecular motors, the inner and outer dynein arms, which are
required for ciliary motility and radial spokes, which regulate ciliary bending. (b) Cross-section
of a basal body, showing a ring of 9 triplet microtubules, which act as a template for building the
ciliary axoneme. (c) Three-dimensional illustration of the basal body showing two of its accessory
structures: the basal foot and striated rootlet. The basal foot bestows rotational asymmetry to the
basal body. In several multiciliated epithelia, the basal foot points in the direction of the ciliary
beat and is a structural basis of the planar polarity in these epithelial cells

12  Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic Germinal Niches

297

Sandoz, 1991), also suggest that the establishment of planar polarity precedes multiciliated cell differentiation. Interestingly, a recent study of hair cells in the mammalian
cochlea suggests that the primary cilium may relay planar polarity signals from the cell
membrane to the cytoskeleton (Jones et al., 2008). Determining how radial glial planar
polarity is transmitted via the primary cilium or its basal body to ependymal progeny
is a provocative and unresolved question.

12.5 Cilia and Basal Bodies
Cilia are hair-like cell surface projections that contain a specialized microtubule
cytoskeleton (axoneme) bounded by cell membrane. Despite their continuum with
the cell body, cilia are specialized organelles with distinct sets of proteins and
diverse functions. Defective primary cilia are associated with various human diseases
including primary ciliary dyskinesia, polycystic kidney disease, Bardet-Biedl
syndrome, retinal degeneration and neural tube defects (Bisgrove and Yost, 2006;
Marshall, 2008; Gerdes et al., 2009).
Cilia are generally divided into two different types, (9 + 2) and (9 + 0), based on
their axonemal structure (Satir and Christensen, 2007). (9 + 2) axonemes consist of
a ring of 9 doublet microtubules surrounding a central pair of singlet microtubules,
whereas (9 + 0) axonemes lack the central pair (Fig. 12.2a). In multicellular organisms, these two types of cilia are found in different tissue types and have different
basic functions. (9 + 2) cilia are found, up to 200–300 per cell, on epithelial cells
lining the respiratory airway, the oviduct, and the ependymal lining of the brain
ventricles, where they beat to sweep mucus or fluid along the epithelium. A single
(9 + 2) cilium propels the sperm cell. The motility of (9 + 2) cilia is generated by the
axonemal dyneins, molecular motors associated with the axoneme (Gibbons and
Rowe, 1965). These motors form the inner and outer dynein arms (Fig.  12.2a),
which extend from one doublet microtubule to the next around the ring, acting to
slide one doublet with respect to the other (Satir, 1965; Summers and Gibbons,
1971; Satir and Christensen, 2007). This is the basic motion underlying ciliary
motility, called doublet sliding (Lindemann, 2004). (9 + 0) cilia include sensory
cilia of invertebrate sensory neurons and vertebrate photoreceptors (outer segment
of photoreceptor is a modified cilium), and primary cilia, which are found one per
cell on almost all vertebrate cell types (Singla and Reiter, 2006). These cilia, with
the exception of nodal (9 + 0) cilia found in the embryonic node (Nonaka et  al.,
1998), do not have the associated molecular motors required for doublet sliding and
are largely thought to be immotile (Satir and Christensen, 2007).
The ciliary axoneme is constructed from a template provided by the basal body,
which has a ring of nine triplet microtubules (Fig. 12.2b) (Anderson, 1972; BettencourtDias and Glover, 2007; Dawe et al., 2007). The basal body is a modified centriole, an
important component of the mitotic spindle apparatus (Rieder et al., 2001; Bornens,
2002). During interphase, the centriole acquires several accessory structures and docks
at the plasma membrane, where it nucleates the axoneme (Dawe et  al., 2007).

298

Z. Mirzadeh et al.

Accessory structures of the basal body include the striated rootlet, which emanates
from the proximal end of the basal body and extends longitudinally into the cytoplasm,
and the basal foot, a single laterally projecting cone-shaped structure (Fig.  12.2c)
(Anderson, 1972). The basal foot bestows rotational asymmetry to the basal body.
In several multiciliated epithelia, the basal foot points in the direction of the ciliary
beat (Boisvieux-Ulrich et al., 1985; Satir and Dirksen, 1985; Mitchell et al., 2007) and
is a structural basis of the planar polarity in these epithelial cells. Structural specializations are also found at the distal end of the basal body where it meets the ciliary
axoneme. These include the terminal plate and transition fibers (Anderson, 1972;
Bettencourt-Dias and Glover, 2007). It has been suggested that these structures form a
molecular sieve that restricts the entry of proteins into the cilium.
Cilia lack protein synthesis machinery. Construction of cilia therefore requires
a specialized intracellular trafficking system called intraflagellar transport (IFT) to
supply ciliary components (Rosenbaum and Witman, 2002). IFT shuttles ciliary
components between the cell body and the tip of the cilium in large complexes,
called IFT particles, carried by microtubule-based motors. This transport occurs in
both the anterograde and retrograde directions (Marshall and Rosenbaum, 2001;
Qin et al., 2004). Anterograde transport, driven by the heterotrimeric motor kinesin-2 (Kozminski et al., 1995), moves axonemal components from the cell body to
the distal tip of the cilium, where the axoneme is assembled. Retrograde transport,
driven by an isoform of cytoplasmic dynein called dynein 2 (or dynein 1b) (Pazour
et al., 1998), returns IFT particles to the cell body. An understanding of IFT
and its role in ciliogenesis has been instrumental to recent functional studies
of primary (9 + 0) cilia. Mouse mutants for IFT motors (KIF3A, a subunit of
kinesin-2, and DYNC2H1, a subunit of cytoplasmic dynein) and IFT particle
subunits (IFT52, IFT57, IFT88, IFT139, and IFT172) have revealed that primary (9 + 0) cilia are essential for mammalian development (Marszalek et  al.,
1999; Takeda et al., 1999; Huangfu et al., 2003; Haycraft et al., 2005; Huangfu
and Anderson, 2005; Liu et al., 2005; May et al., 2005; Houde et al., 2006; Tran
et al., 2008).
Recent studies in the past decade have revealed that the primary cilium plays a
central role in several developmental signaling pathways, including hedgehog and
Wnt signaling (Singla and Reiter, 2006; Eggenschwiler and Anderson, 2007). Studies
from mutant mice defective for primary cilia have shown that hedgehog signaling
requires the primary cilium for both activation and repression of the pathway
(Huangfu et al., 2003; Haycraft et al., 2005; Huangfu and Anderson, 2005; Liu et al.,
2005; May et  al., 2005; Han et  al., 2008, 2009; Spassky et  al., 2008; Wong et  al.,
2009). In the absence of hedgehog ligand, Patched1, the receptor for hedgehog, localizes to cilia and inhibits signaling by preventing Smoothened, a downstream
activator, from entering cilia (Rohatgi et al., 2007). Hedgehog binding to Patched1
allows Smoothened to enter cilia. This ciliary localization of Smoothened is essential
for it to signal; a mutant Smoothened unable to enter cilia fails to activate the
downstream pathway (Corbit et  al., 2005). Primary cilia are also required for
repression of the hedgehog pathway. In the absence of hedgehog ligand, Gli3, a

12  Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic Germinal Niches

299

downstream transcription factor in the hedgehog pathway, is constitutively processed
to its repressor form, which represses hedgehog target genes. The production of Gli3
repressor depends on the presence of cilia; without cilia, Gli3 repressors fail to form,
resulting in the de-repression of hedgehog target genes (Huangfu et  al., 2003;
Haycraft et al., 2005; Huangfu and Anderson, 2005; Liu et al., 2005; May et al., 2005;
Han et  al., 2009; Wong et  al., 2009). Importantly, recent studies have showed that
transit neural progenitors require primary cilia to receive hedgehog signaling necessary for their expansion in the cerebellum (Chizhikov et  al., 2007; Spassky et  al.,
2008) and for the formation of adult neural stem cells in the dentate gyrus of the
hippocampus (Han et  al., 2008). Wnt signaling, which diverges into at least two
pathways – the canonical (b-catenin dependent) pathway and the non-canonical
(planar cell polarity or PCP) pathway (Veeman et al., 2003; Logan and Nusse, 2004) –
also appears to be regulated by the primary cilium. These two pathways diverge at
the level of the Wnt pathway protein Dishevelled (Dsh); cytoplasmic Dsh functions
in the canonical pathway while membrane-bound Dsh functions in the non-canonical
pathway (Axelrod et al., 1998). A recent study showed that Inversin, which localizes
to primary cilia, acts as a switch from the canonical to the non-canonical pathway by
targeting cytoplasmic Dsh for degradation (Simons et al., 2005). Several additional
studies, in the kidney (Lin et al., 2003), the pancreas (Cano et al., 2004), and in mouse
embryos and embryonic stem cells (Corbit et al., 2008), have supported the conclusion that the primary cilium normally suppresses canonical Wnt signaling. Disrupting
ciliogenesis in these systems results in hyper-activity of the canonical Wnt pathway.
In addition, disrupting the primary cilium leads to PCP defects, such as misalignment
of cochlear stereociliary bundles and an open neural tube due to failed convergent
extension (Ross et al., 2005; Jones et al., 2008). Notably, recent studies also suggest
that Wnt signaling requires basal body function, but not the primary cilium (Huang
and Schier, 2009; Ocbina et al., 2009). Interestingly, disrupting the PCP pathway in
Xenopus results not only in planar polarity defects, but also defects in ciliogenesis
and consequently, Hedgehog signaling (Park et  al., 2006). The primary cilium has
therefore been likened to an antenna, where several intercellular signaling pathways
intersect (Singla and Reiter, 2006; Eggenschwiler and Anderson, 2007).

12.6 SVZ Type B Cells Are Derived from Radial Glia
Radial glia, the embryonic neural stem cells, transform into astrocytes (Schmechel
and Rakic, 1979; Voigt, 1989) and ependymal cells (Spassky et al., 2005) shortly
after birth. In the lateral wall of the LV, some of these cells (striatal radial glia) persist
for approximately 1 week postnatally. They can be identified by their radial morphology, ultrastructure, and their expression of RC2 (Merkle et al., 2004). In addition,
these neonatal radial glia exhibit the typical properties of interkinetic nuclear migration (Tramontin et al., 2003). In contrast, there are no SVZ astrocytes observed in
the lateral wall of the LV at birth. Over the course of the first week, RC2 expression

300

Z. Mirzadeh et al.

Fig. 12.3  The neural stem cell lineage from the embryonic neural tube to the adult brain. Neuroepithelial
cells of the neural tube, radial glia of the developing brain, and type B cells of the adult SVZ share
common epithelial characteristics including apical–basal polarity, apical contact with the ventricle, and
basal contact with pial basal lamina and/or blood vessels. Illustration by Kenneth Xavier Probst of Xavier
Studio, adapted with permission from the Annual Review of Neuroscience

and radial glial morphology gradually disappear and are replaced by the expression
of GFAP and S100B, markers of SVZ astrocytes and ependymal cells, respectively
(Merkle et al., 2004; Spassky et al., 2005). Although the transformation of radial
glia into parenchymal astrocytes had been shown (Schmechel and Rakic, 1979;
Voigt, 1989), definitive evidence was lacking that radial glia also generate SVZ
astrocytes, the Type B cells that function as adult neural stem cells. To provide this
evidence, Merkle et al. (2004) traced the lineage of neonatal striatal radial glia in
Z/EG mice, a Cre reporter transgenic line. Z/EG mice carry a constitutivelyexpressed transgene encoding lacZ and a STOP cassette, flanked by loxP sites,
followed by enhanced GFP (eGFP). Cre-mediated excision replaces the expression
of lacZ with eGFP, providing a permanent labeling of cells and their progeny.
To specifically label radial glial cell bodies in the striatal VZ, adenovirus expressing
Cre was injected into the ventrolateral striatum of neonatal Z/EG mice. This resulted
in infection of local striatal neurons and radial glial processes that passed through
the injection site. Because adenovirus is efficiently retrogradely transported in the
radial process to the radial glial cell body, this resulted in permanent labeling of radial
glia in the lateral wall of the lateral ventricle. Importantly, radial glia were the only
cell types in the lateral wall labeled by this method, confirmed by electron microscopy at 2 days after injection. At longer survivals, labeled radial glia had produced
labeled SVZ Type B cells, which were shown to behave like neural stem cells
in vitro and generate C cells, A cells and olfactory bulb interneurons in vivo. Control
experiments demonstrated that viral diffusion was limited to a small area around
the injection site and that infective viral activity disappeared in less than an hour
after infection, confirming that Type B cells were not labeled directly. In addition,

12  Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic Germinal Niches

301

transplantation experiments confirmed that labeled radial glia, not labeled striatal
cells at the injection site, were the progenitors of the Type B cells. These experiments provided a unified view on the lineage of neural stem cells as belonging to a
radial-astroglial lineage (Fig. 12.3).

12.7 Evidence for Apical–Basal Polarity of Type B cells
The finding of a continuous lineage of radial-astroglial neural stem cells for the embryonic and adult brain suggests that SVZ Type B cells, like ependymal cells, may inherit
apical–basal polarity and epithelial organization from their radial glial progenitors. There
are several additional clues that SVZ Type B cells may be organized into a specialized
epithelium. One clue comes from early experiments aimed at identifying the neural stem
cells in the adult SVZ. Following Ara-C treatment, it was observed that a few Type B
cells (B1 subtype) made apical contact with the ventricle (Doetsch et al., 1999a). This
contact occurred through an apical extension interposed between ependymal cells.
Often, a primary cilium was observed extending from the apical surface into the
ventricular lumen. Type B cells in contact with the ventricle were rarely observed in
untreated animals. It was inferred from these experiments that ventricular contact may
be an indication of an “activated” Type B cell, stimulated to regenerate the SVZ. In
addition to Ara-C treatment, other methods of SVZ stimulation, including intraventricular infusions of epidermal growth factor (EGF) (Doetsch et al., 2002) or activation
of Ephrin B signaling (Conover et al., 2000), also result in increased numbers of Type
B cells making apical contact with the ventricle. This apical contact, including the
extension of a primary cilium into the ventricle, is reminiscent of the apical ventricular
contact of NE and radial glial cells in the embryo and suggests that at least some Type
B cells have the potential to form apical specializations. However, it was not known
whether this was an induced, transient organization or a stable property of Type B
cells. In addition, since all these studies relied on EM to identify the apical structures,
it was difficult to quantify or provide a comprehensive view on the relationship of Type
B cells touching the ventricle to other cells within this region.
In the embryonic brain, the apical membrane domain of NE and radial glial cells
is segregated from the basolateral membrane by adherens and tight junctions located
just beneath the apical ventricular surface (Aaku-Saraste et al., 1996; Chenn et al.,
1998; Kosodo et al., 2004). The basal compartment of these cells is readily identified
by the radial fiber and its basal contacts with both cortical blood vessels and pial
basal lamina (Alvarez-Buylla et al., 1987; Misson et al., 1988; Noctor et al., 2001;
Halfter et  al., 2002; Haubst et  al., 2006). It has been shown that soluble factors
secreted by endothelial cells promote stem cell self-renewal and enhance neuronal
production of both embryonic VZ and adult SVZ neural stem cells in vitro (Shen
et al., 2004). Type B cells of the SVZ may therefore be regulated by factors in and
around blood vessels similar to their radial glial progenitors (Jiang et  al., 1998;
Shingo et  al., 2003; Jackson et  al., 2006; Kerever et  al., 2007). Recent evidence
shows that an extensive network of blood vessel basal lamina infiltrates the adult

302

Z. Mirzadeh et al.

SVZ neurogenic niche and makes contact with various SVZ cell types and astrocytic
processes (Mercier et al., 2002; Alvarez-Buylla and Lim, 2004). This suggested that
Type B cells may also have basal membrane domains in contact with basal lamina.
In this context, it is intriguing that vascular development in the embryonic brain
begins at the surface and progresses inward towards the ventricles (Mancuso et al.,
2008). Could this outside-in pattern mean that embryonic radial glia and adult Type
B cells have a topologically equivalent interaction with blood vessel basal lamina?
Interestingly, SVZ astrocytes in the ventral part of the adult LV have a long GFAP+
basal process that extends deep into the parenchyma (Sundholm-Peters et al., 2004),
reminiscent of the radial fiber of radial glia. Radial glial morphology can also be
re-induced in some adult SVZ astrocytes of the pallial wall of the LV by re-expression
of ErbB2, one of the EGF receptors (Ghashghaei et  al., 2007). Finally, recent
evidence from en-face imaging of the adult SVZ provides a new anatomical perspective of this germinal niche, demonstrating that Type B1 cells have epithelial organization including both apical contact with the ventricle and basal contact with blood
vessels (Mirzadeh et al., 2008; Shen et al., 2008; Tavazoie et al., 2008).

12.8 Epithelial Organization of Type B cells
En-face imaging reveals that in addition to ependymal cells, type B1 cells contact
the lateral ventricles in the adult brain. Type B1 cells have an apical surface in contact with the ventricle and exhibit apical specializations including intercellular junc-

Fig. 12.4  Pinwheel architecture of the ventricular surface in the mixed neuroepithelium of the
adult brain. (a) Confocal image of the surface of the lateral wall of the lateral ventricle stained for
g-tubulin (red) and b-catenin (green) reveals pinwheels with centrally located B cell apical
surfaces surrounded by ependymal cells. Scale bar 10 mm. (b) Tracing of the b-catenin+ membranes
and color coding of B cells (blue) and ependymal cells (yellow, red, magenta) to illustrate three
pinwheels. Some ependymal cells occupy positions in more than one pinwheel

12  Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic Germinal Niches

303

Fig. 12.5  The adult VZ neurogenic niche. (a) Maximum projection of a confocal stack taken of
a lateral wall wholemount stained for GFAP. Blue arrows indicate the ventricle-contacting apical
process and red arrows indicate the blood vessel-contacting basal process. Scale bar 10 mm.
(b) Three-dimensional model of the adult VZ neurogenic niche illustrating B cells (blue), C cells
(green), and A cells (red). B cells have a long basal process that terminates on blood vessels
(orange) and an apical ending at the ventricle surface. Note the pinwheel organization (light and
dark brown) composed of ependymal cells encircling B apical surfaces. Illustration by Kenneth
Xavier Probst of Xavier Studio, adapted with permission from Cell Stem Cell

304

Z. Mirzadeh et al.

tional complexes and a primary cilium (Mirzadeh et al., 2008). En-face imaging also
reveals that type B1 cells contain a previously unappreciated long basal process that
terminates on blood vessels (Mirzadeh et al., 2008; Shen et al., 2008; Tavazoie et al.,
2008); these cells are therefore morphologically similar to their radial glial progenitors. In fact, type B1 cells may be considered modified radial glia that maintain a
“neuroepithelium” in the adult brain. A view emerges of the neural stem cell lineage
from early embryonic development through adulthood (neuroepithelial cells to
radial glia to type B cells), as consisting of cell types exhibiting a progressive transition towards more glial characteristics while maintaining epithelial properties
(Fig. 12.3) (Kriegstein and Alvarez-Buylla, 2009). That is, although Type B1 cells
in the adult brain are astrocyte-like cells, they share many epithelial characteristics
with neuroepithelial cells of the neural tube. However, unlike the embryonic neuroepithelium that contains only neural stem cells (neuroepithelial cells or radial glia), the
adult neuroepithelium is highly modified and contains ependymal cells in addition
to B1 cells. Ependymal cells occupy the majority of the surface of this mixed
neuroepithelium and squeeze the apical cytoplasm of neighboring B1 cells, pushing
their cell bodies away from the lateral ventricle toward the subventricular zone
(Mirzadeh et al., 2008). A mixed neuroepithelium of type B cells and ependymal
cells has also been described in the brains of adult canaries (Alvarez-Buylla et al.,
1998) and adult reptiles (Garcia-Verdugo et al., 2002). Both of these studies were
done by serial section electron microscopy. Interestingly, en-face imaging of the
mixed neuroepithelium in the adult mammalian brain reveals a previously unappreciated center-surround organization, where the apical surfaces of B1 cells are surrounded by ependymal cells forming pinwheels (Fig.  12.4). The pinwheels are
present throughout the neurogenic niche, but absent from non-neurogenic ventricular
walls, suggesting that this organization plays a fundamental role for adult neurogenesis. Ependymal cells express high levels of noggin, which helps create a niche for
type B1 cells to function as neuronal progenitors (Lim et al., 2000; Peretto et al.,
2004). Ependymal cells also form specialized apical tight and adherens junctions
with B1 cells. The pinwheels may provide a permissive architecture for interaction
and regulation between differentiated ependymal cells and neurogenic B1 cells.
As indicated above, in addition to apical ventricular contact, Type B1 cells have
a long basal process that penetrates the underlying brain parenchyma (Fig. 12.5).
This process terminates directly on blood vessels forming specialized endfeet
(Mirzadeh et al., 2008). Basal contact with blood vessels and the surrounding basal
lamina indicates that Type B1 cells have a true basal membrane. The basal process
of some B1 cells also forms en-passant endings, thereby contacting multiple blood
vessels. Similar endings are observed in radial glial fibers in the developing neocortex (Noctor et  al., 2001) and radial cell fibers in song birds (Alvarez-Buylla
et al., 1987). Interestingly, the basal processes of B1 cells do not always terminate
on nearby blood vessels within the SVZ. Instead, they terminate on blood vessels,
often at a distance, located along the trajectory of the long basal process. Together
with evidence that Type B1 cells are derived from radial glia, this suggests that
the basal processes are remnants of radial glial fibers, which have retracted away
from the pial surface but have maintained contact with the invading vasculature.

12  Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic Germinal Niches

305

As discussed above, recent evidence indicates that contact with blood vessels may
be essential for neural stem cell function in both the embryonic and adult brain
(Palmer et al., 2000; Alvarez-Buylla and Lim, 2004; Cao et al., 2004; Shen et al.,
2004, 2008; Tavazoie et al., 2008). New anatomical analysis has revealed that the
vascular network in the SVZ has a leaky blood–brain barrier, with areas along the
blood vessels that lack endothelial tight junctions, pericytes and astrocytic endfeet
(Tavazoie et al., 2008). This study found that transit amplifying C cells were often
located at these sites in direct contact with endothelial cells. Interestingly, results
from another recent study suggest that SVZ astrocytes, like NE cells, express a6b1
integrin, a laminin receptor, which they use to bind to blood vessel basal lamina
(Shen et  al., 2008). Intraventricular infusions of a blocking antibody against this
receptor lead to an increase in the distance between SVZ astrocytes and blood
vessels and a statistically significant increase in proliferation in the SVZ.
Maintenance of basal contact with blood vessels may therefore allow B1 cells
access to regulatory cues from the vascular microenvironment.
Furthermore, radial glia of the developing neocortex (Rakic, 1972; Noctor et al.,
2001), radial astrocytes in the hippocampus (Seri et al., 2004), and radial cells in
song birds (Alvarez-Buylla and Nottebohm, 1988) use the long basal process to
maintain contact with neuronal progeny during early stages of differentiation and
migration. This contact may be important for guiding the migration and maturation
of nascent progeny. Something similar may take place in the adult SVZ. Many of
the basal processes of B1 cells are oriented in the same direction as neuroblast
migration, especially in the dense dorsal corridor of the SVZ (Sawamoto et  al.,
2006; Mirzadeh et al., 2008; Shen et al., 2008; Tavazoie et al., 2008). In this region,
chains of migrating neuroblasts appear to run along the basal process of B1 cells.
B1 cells’ basal processes may contribute to their initial directional migration and
differentiation. Recent work suggests that chemorepellants in cerebrospinal fluid
and its directional flow also contribute to directional migration (Sawamoto et al.,
2006). B1 cells may bridge these two compartments: they may detect chemorepellants through their apical ventricular ending and transfer this information to the
SVZ along their basal processes that run parallel to chains of migrating neuroblasts.
Therefore the organization of B1 cell’s basal extensions could play important roles
in both the regulation of stem cell proliferation by maintaining specialized contacts
with blood vessels and the interaction of these stem cells with their progeny.

12.9 Conclusion
Understanding the epithelial organization of Type B1 cells and their topological
relationship with the ventricle (apically) and blood vessels (basally) provides an
anatomical model where molecules can be placed. Several intercellular signaling
pathways are known to regulate the germinal activities of type B cells, including
FGF (Kuhn et al., 1997), PDGF (Jackson et al., 2006), Shh (Machold et al., 2003;
Palma et  al., 2005), Wnt (Yu et  al., 2006; Adachi et  al., 2007), Noggin/BMP

306

Z. Mirzadeh et al.

Fig. 12.6  Hypothetical model of signaling molecules impinging upon B1 cells in distinct apical
and basal compartments. B cells are in a position to integrate signals derived apically from
ependymal cells and the ventricular surface with signals derived basally from blood vessels and
the basal lamina. Integration of signals from these distinct compartments may be essential to the
germinal activity of B cells

(Lim et al., 2000), and Ephrin signaling (Conover et al., 2000). In addition, type B1
cells are regulated by signaling pathways dependent on cell–cell contact, such as
Notch signaling (Nyfeler et al., 2005; Givogri et al., 2006), and are likely also regulated by intercellular junctional complexes, such as gap junctions. These diverse
regulatory mechanisms may impinge upon type B1 cells with spatially specific
organization. Conversely, the elaborate morphology of type B1 cells may allow
these cells to bridge between different regulatory microenvironments, such as the
ventricular surface and the vasculature. In addition, the ability of type B1 cells to
respond to specific signaling pathways may depend on localization of receptors to
specific micro-domains within the cell. For example, the ability of these cells to
respond to Shh may depend on the localization of Smoothened, the Shh co-receptor,
to the primary cilium (Huangfu et al., 2003; Corbit et al., 2005). Noggin, which is
highly expressed by ependymal cells and creates a neurogenic niche for type B1
cells (Lim et al., 2000), may act at the level of the apical process within the pinwheel organization. Other signaling pathways may operate at the level of the basal
process: a recent study showed that blood vessel basal lamina in the SVZ concentrates FGF2 (Kerever et  al., 2007), which promotes the neurogenic activity of
type B cells. A hypothetical model is provided in Fig. 12.6. Altogether, this indicates that the epithelial organization of type B1 cells may allow them to establish
topological relationships with essential apical and basal regulatory microenvironments.

12  Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic Germinal Niches

307

Determining the functional significance of the pinwheel organization may yield
insights into the role of B1 cell apical specializations such as the primary cilium
and its associated basal body. These structures may be essential for progenitor function in the adult ventricular zone. Interestingly, a recent study of asymmetric radial
glial cell division in the developing cortex suggested that inheritance of the mother
centriole, which transforms into the basal body during interphase, determined
which daughter cell retained apical contact and progenitor identity (Wang et  al.,
2009). A similar mechanism may be operating in the adult ventricular zone, to
maintain the population of neurogenic ventricle-contacting type B1 cells.
Here we have reviewed the epithelial organization of the neuroepithelial-radial
glial-type B1 cell lineage of primary progenitors in the developing and adult brain.
It will be interesting to investigate how these epithelial properties are essential to
the common function of these cells as progenitors and the key developmental
transitions that make these cells distinct.
Acknowledgements  This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants
HD-32116 and NS28478, the Sandler Family Supporting Foundation, and the John G. Bowes
Research Fund. A.A.-B. holds the Heather and Melanie Muss Endowed Chair. We thank Kenneth
Xavier Probst of Xavier Studio for assisting with the design and preparation of Figs. 12.3 and 12.5.

References
Aaku-Saraste E, Hellwig A, Huttner WB (1996) Loss of occludin and functional tight junctions,
but not ZO-1, during neural tube closure – remodeling of the neuroepithelium prior to neurogenesis. Dev Biol 180:664–679.
Adachi K, Mirzadeh Z, Sakaguchi M, Yamashita T, Nikolcheva T, Gotoh Y, Peltz G, Gong L, Kawase T,
Alvarez-Buylla A, Okano H, Sawamoto K (2007) Beta-catenin signaling promotes proliferation
of progenitor cells in the adult mouse subventricular zone. Stem Cells 25:2827–2836.
Afonso C, Henrique D (2006) PAR3 acts as a molecular organizer to define the apical domain of
chick neuroepithelial cells. J Cell Sci 119:4293–4304.
Alberts B, Bray D, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Watson JD (1994) Molecular Biology of the Cell,
3rd Edition. New York: Garland Publishing, Inc.
Altman J (1962) Are new neurons formed in the brains of adult mammals? Science
135:1127–1128.
Altman J (1963) Autoradiographic investigation of cell proliferation in the brains of rats and cats.
Anat Rec 145:573–591.
Altman J (1967) Postnatal growth and differentiation of the mammalian brain, with implications
for a morphological theory of memory. In: The Neurosciences: First Study Program (Quarton
GC, Melnechuck T, Schmitt FO, eds), pp 763–743. New York: Rockefeller University Press.
Altman J (1969) Autoradiographic and histological studies of postnatal neurogenesis. IV. Cell
proliferation and migration in the anterior forebrain, with special reference to persisting neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb. J Comp Neurol 137:433–458.
Altman J, Bayer SA (1990) Mosaic organization of the hippocampal neuroepithelium and the
multiple germinal sources of dentate granule cells. J Comp Neurol 301:325–342.
Altman J, Das GD (1965) Autoradiographic and histological evidence of postnatal hippocampal
neurogenesis in rats. J Comp Neurol 124:319–336.
Alvarez-Buylla A, Garcia-Verdugo JM (2002) Neurogenesis in adult subventricular zone.
J Neurosci 22:629–634.

308

Z. Mirzadeh et al.

Alvarez-Buylla A, Lim DA (2004) For the long run: maintaining germinal niches in the adult
brain. Neuron 41:683–686.
Alvarez-Buylla A, Nottebohm F (1988) Migration of young neurons in adult avian brain. Nature
335:353–354.
Alvarez-Buylla A, Buskirk DR, Nottebohm F (1987) Monoclonal antibody reveals radial glia in
adult avian brain. J Comp Neurol 264:159–170.
Alvarez-Buylla A, Theelen M, Nottebohm F (1990) Proliferation “hot spots” in adult avian
ventricular zone reveal radial cell division. Neuron 5:101–109.
Alvarez-Buylla A, García-Verdugo JM, Mateo A, Merchant-Larios H (1998) Primary neural
precursors and intermitotic nuclear migration in the ventricular zone of adult canaries.
J Neurosci 18:1020–1037.
Alvarez-Buylla A, Seri B, Doetsch F (2002) Identification of neural stem cells in the adult vertebrate brain. Brain Res Bull 57:751–758.
Anderson RG (1972) The three-dimensional structure of the basal body from the rhesus monkey
oviduct. J Cell Biol 54:246–265.
Anthony TE, Klein C, Fishell G, Heintz N (2004) Radial glia serve as neuronal progenitors in all
regions of the central nervous system. Neuron 41:881–890.
Astrom KE, Webster HD (1991) The early development of the neopallial wall and area choroidea in fetal rats. A light and electron microscopic study. Adv Anat Embryol Cell Biol
123:1–76.
Axelrod JD, Miller JR, Shulman JM, Moon RT, Perrimon N (1998) Differential recruitment of
Dishevelled provides signaling specificity in the planar cell polarity and Wingless signaling
pathways. Genes Dev 12:2610–2622.
Bettencourt-Dias M, Glover DM (2007) Centrosome biogenesis and function: centrosomics brings
new understanding. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8:451–463.
Bisgrove BW, Yost HJ (2006) The roles of cilia in developmental disorders and disease.
Development 133:4131–4143.
Bittman K, Owens DF, Kriegstein AR, LoTurco JJ (1997) Cell coupling and uncoupling in the
ventricular zone of developing neocortex. J Neurosci 17:7037–7044.
Boisvieux-Ulrich E, Sandoz D (1991) Determination of ciliary polarity precedes differentiation in
the epithelial cells of quail oviduct. Biol Cell 72:3–14.
Boisvieux-Ulrich E, Laine MC, Sandoz D (1985) The orientation of ciliary basal bodies in quail
oviduct is related to the ciliary beating cycle commencement. Biol Cell 55:147–150.
Bonfanti L, Peretto P, Merighi A, Fasolo A (1997) Newly-generated cells from the rostral migratory stream in the accessory olfactory bulb of the adult rat. Neuroscience 81:489–502.
Bornens M (2002) Centrosome composition and microtubule anchoring mechanisms. Curr Opin
Cell Biol 14:25–34.
Bruni JE (1998) Ependymal development, proliferation, and functions: a review. Microsc Res
Tech 41:2–13.
Cano DA, Murcia NS, Pazour GJ, Hebrok M (2004) Orpk mouse model of polycystic kidney
disease reveals essential role of primary cilia in pancreatic tissue organization. Development
131:3457–3467.
Cao L, Jiao X, Zuzga DS, Liu Y, Fong DM (2004) VEGF links hippocampal activity with neurogenesis, learning and memory. Nat Genet 36:827.
Capela A, Temple S (2002) LeX/ssea-1 is expressed by adult mouse CNS stem cells, identifying
them as nonependymal. Neuron 35:865–875.
Cappello S, Attardo A, Wu X, Iwasato T, Itohara S, Wilsch-Brauninger M, Eilken HM, Rieger
MA, Schroeder TT, Huttner WB, Brakebusch C, Gotz M (2006) The Rho-GTPase cdc42 regulates neural progenitor fate at the apical surface. Nat Neurosci 9:1099–1107.
Carleton A, Petreanu LT, Lansford R, Alvarez-Buylla A, Lledo PM (2003) Becoming a new
neuron in the adult olfactory bulb. Nat Neurosci 6:507–518.
Cathcart RS, 3rd, Worthington WC, Jr. (1964) Ciliary movement in the rat cerebral ventricles:
clearing action and directions of currents. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 23:609–618.
Caviness VS, Jr., Takahashi T, Nowakowski RS (1995) Numbers, time and neocortical neuronogenesis: a general developmental and evolutionary model. Trends Neurosci 18:379–383.

12  Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic Germinal Niches

309

Chenn A, Zhang YA, Chang BT, McConnell SK (1998) Intrinsic polarity of mammalian neuroepithelial cells. Mol Cell Neurosci 11:183–193.
Chiasson BJ, Tropepe V, Morshead CM, Van der Kooy D (1999) Adult mammalian forebrain
ependymal and subependymal cells demonstrate proliferative potential, but only subependymal cells have neural stem cell characteristics. J Neurosci 19:4462–4471.
Chizhikov VV, Davenport J, Zhang Q, Shih EK, Cabello OA, Fuchs JL, Yoder BK, Millen KJ
(2007) Cilia proteins control cerebellar morphogenesis by promoting expansion of the granule
progenitor pool. J Neurosci 27:9780–9789.
Colas JF, Schoenwolf GC (2001) Towards a cellular and molecular understanding of neurulation.
Dev Dyn 221:117–145.
Conover JC, Doetsch F, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Gale NW, Yancopoulos GD, Alvarez-Buylla A
(2000) Disruption of Eph/ephrin signaling affects migration and proliferation in the adult
subventricular zone. Nat Neurosci 3:1091–1097.
Copp AJ, Greene ND, Murdoch JN (2003) Dishevelled: linking convergent extension with neural
tube closure. Trends Neurosci 26:453–455.
Corbit KC, Aanstad P, Singla V, Norman AR, Stainier DY, Reiter JF (2005) Vertebrate smoothened functions at the primary cilium. Nature 437:1018–1021.
Corbit KC, Shyer AE, Dowdle WE, Gaulden J, Singla V, Reiter JF (2008) Kif3a constrains betacatenin-dependent Wnt signalling through dual ciliary and non-ciliary mechanisms. Nat Cell
Biol 10:70–76.
Costa MR, Wen G, Lepier A, Schroeder T, Gotz M (2008) Par-complex proteins promote
proliferative progenitor divisions in the developing mouse cerebral cortex. Development
135:11–22.
Dawe HR, Farr H, Gull K (2007) Centriole/basal body morphogenesis and migration during
ciliogenesis in animal cells. J Cell Sci 120:7–15.
Del Bigio MR (1995) The ependyma: a protective barrier between brain and cerebrospinal fluid.
Glia 14:1–13.
Doetsch F, Alvarez-Buylla A (1996) Network of tangential pathways for neuronal migration in
adult mammalian brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:14895–14900.
Doetsch F, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (1997) Cellular composition and threedimensional organization of the subventricular germinal zone in the adult mammalian brain.
J Neurosci 17:5046–5061.
Doetsch F, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (1999a) Regeneration of a germinal layer in the
adult mammalian brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:11619–11624.
Doetsch F, Caille I, Lim DA, García-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (1999b) Subventricular zone
astrocytes are neural stem cells in the adult mammalian brain. Cell 97:1–20.
Doetsch F, Petreanu L, Caille I, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (2002) EGF converts
transit-amplifying neurogenic precursors in the adult brain into multipotent stem cells. Neuron
36:1021–1034.
Eggenschwiler JT, Anderson KV (2007) Cilia and developmental signaling. Annu Rev Cell Dev
Biol 23:345–373.
Etienne-Manneville S, Manneville JB, Nicholls S, Ferenczi MA, Hall A (2005) Cdc42 and Par6PKCzeta regulate the spatially localized association of Dlg1 and APC to control cell polarization. J Cell Biol 170:895–901.
Eves EM, Tucker MS, Roback JD, Downen M, Rosner MR, Wainer BH (1992) Immortal rat hippocampal cell lines exhibit neuronal and glial lineages and neurotrophin gene expression. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 89:4373–4377.
Feng L, Heintz N (1995) Differentiating neurons activate transcription of the brain lipid-binding
protein gene in radial glia through a novel regulatory element. Development 121:1719–1730.
Filippov V, Kronenberg G, Pivneva T, Reuter K, Steiner B, Wang LP, Yamaguchi M, Kettenmann H,
Kempermann G (2003) Subpopulation of nestin-expressing progenitor cells in the adult
murine hippocampus shows electrophysiological and morphological characteristics of astrocytes. Mol Cell Neurosci 23:373–382.
Frederiksen K, McKay RDG (1988) Proliferation and differentiation of rat neuroepithelial precursor cells in vivo. J Neurosci 8:1144–1151.

310

Z. Mirzadeh et al.

Fukuda S, Kato F, Tozuka Y, Yamaguchi M, Miyamoto Y, Hisatsune T (2003) Two distinct
subpopulations of nestin-positive cells in adult mouse dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 23:9357–9366.
Gabay L, Lowell S, Rubin LL, Anderson DJ (2003) Deregulation of dorsoventral patterning by FGF
confers trilineage differentiation capacity on CNS stem cells in vitro. Neuron 40:485–499.
Gadisseux JF, Evrard P (1985) Glial neuronal relationship in the developing central nervous
system. Dev Neurosci 7:12–32.
Garcia AD, Doan NB, Imura T, Bush TG, Sofroniew MV (2004) GFAP-expressing progenitors
are the principal source of constitutive neurogenesis in adult mouse forebrain. Nat Neurosci
7:1233–1241.
Garcia-Verdugo JM, Ferron S, Flames N, Collado L, Desfilis E, Font E (2002) The proliferative
ventricular zone in adult vertebrates: a comparative study using reptiles, birds, and mammals.
Brain Res Bull 57:765–775.
Gerdes JM, Davis EE, Katsanis N (2009) The vertebrate primary cilium in development, homeostasis, and disease. Cell 137:32–45.
Geschwind DH, Ou J, Easterday MC, Dougherty JD, Jackson RL, Chen Z, Antoine H, Terskikh
A, Weissman IL, Nelson SF, Kornblum HI (2001) A genetic analysis of neural progenitor differentiation. Neuron 29:325–339.
Ghashghaei HT, Weimer JM, Schmid RS, Yokota Y, McCarthy KD, Popko B, Anton ES (2007)
Reinduction of ErbB2 in astrocytes promotes radial glial progenitor identity in adult cerebral
cortex. Genes Dev 21:3258–3271.
Gibbons IR, Rowe AJ (1965) Dynein: a protein with adenosine triphosphatase activity from cilia.
Science 149:424–426.
Givogri MI, de Planell M, Galbiati F, Superchi D, Gritti A, Vescovi A, de Vellis J, Bongarzone ER
(2006) Notch signaling in astrocytes and neuroblasts of the adult subventricular zone in health
and after cortical injury. Dev Neurosci 28:81–91.
Goldman SA, Nottebohm F (1983) Neuronal production, migration, and differentiation in a vocal
control nucleus of the adult female canary brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 80:2390–2394.
Gotz M, Huttner WB (2005) The cell biology of neurogenesis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 6:777–788.
Greene ND, Gerrelli D, Van Straaten HW, Copp AJ (1998) Abnormalities of floor plate, notochord
and somite differentiation in the loop-tail (Lp) mouse: a model of severe neural tube defects.
Mech Dev 73:59–72.
Gritti A, Bonfanti L, Doetsch F, Caille I, Alvarez-Buylla A, Lim DA, Galli R, Verdugo JM,
Herrera DG, Vescovi AL (2002) Multipotent neural stem cells reside into the rostral extension
and olfactory bulb of adult rodents. J Neurosci 22:437–445.
Hack MA, Saghatelyan A, de Chevigny A, Pfeifer A, Ashery-Padan R, Lledo PM, Gotz M (2005)
Neuronal fate determinants of adult olfactory bulb neurogenesis. Nat Neurosci 8:865–872.
Halfter W, Dong S, Yip YP, Willem M, Mayer U (2002) A critical function of the pial basement
membrane in cortical histogenesis. J Neurosci 22:6029–6040.
Han YG, Spassky N, Romaguera-Ros M, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Aguilar A, Schneider-Maunoury S,
Alvarez-Buylla A (2008) Hedgehog signaling and primary cilia are required for the formation
of adult neural stem cells. Nat Neurosci 11:277–284.
Han YG, Kim HJ, Dlugosz AA, Ellison DW, Gilbertson RJ, Alvarez-Buylla A (2009) Dual and
opposing roles of primary cilia in medulloblastoma development. Nat Med 15:1062–1065.
Hatta K, Takagi S, Fujisawa H, Takeichi M (1987) Spatial and temporal expression pattern of
N-cadherin cell adhesion molecules correlated with morphogenetic processes of chicken
embryos. Dev Biol 120:215–227.
Hatten ME (1999) Central nervous system neuronal migration. [Review] [124 refs]. Annu Rev
Neurosci 22:511–539.
Haubensak W, Attardo A, Denk W, Huttner WB (2004) Neurons arise in the basal neuroepithelium of the early mammalian telencephalon: a major site of neurogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 101:3196–3201.
Haubst N, Georges-Labouesse E, De Arcangelis A, Mayer U, Gotz M (2006) Basement membrane
attachment is dispensable for radial glial cell fate and for proliferation, but affects positioning
of neuronal subtypes. Development 133:3245–3254.

12  Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic Germinal Niches

311

Haycraft CJ, Banizs B, Aydin-Son Y, Zhang Q, Michaud EJ, Yoder BK (2005) Gli2 and Gli3
localize to cilia and require the intraflagellar transport protein polaris for processing and function. PLoS Genet 1:e53.
Hockfield S, McKay RDG (1985) Identification of major cell classes in the developing mammalian nervous system. J Neurosci 5, No l2:3310–3328.
Houde C, Dickinson RJ, Houtzager VM, Cullum R, Montpetit R, Metzler M, Simpson EM, Roy S,
Hayden MR, Hoodless PA, Nicholson DW (2006) Hippi is essential for node cilia assembly
and Sonic hedgehog signaling. Dev Biol 300:523–533.
Huang P, Schier AF (2009) Dampened Hedgehog signaling but normal Wnt signaling in zebrafish
without cilia. Development 136:3089–3098.
Huangfu D, Anderson KV (2005) Cilia and Hedgehog responsiveness in the mouse. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 102:11325–11330.
Huangfu D, Liu A, Rakeman AS, Murcia NS, Niswander L, Anderson KV (2003) Hedgehog
signalling in the mouse requires intraflagellar transport proteins. Nature 426:83–87.
Hutterer A, Betschinger J, Petronczki M, Knoblich JA (2004) Sequential roles of Cdc42, Par-6,
aPKC, and Lgl in the establishment of epithelial polarity during Drosophila embryogenesis.
Dev Cell 6:845–854.
Huttner WB, Brand M (1997) Asymmetric division and polarity of neuroepithelial cells. Curr
Opin Neurobiol 7:29–39.
Huttner WB, Kosodo Y (2005) Symmetric versus asymmetric cell division during neurogenesis in
the developing vertebrate central nervous system. Curr Opin Cell Biol 17:648–657.
Ibanez-Tallon I, Pagenstecher A, Fliegauf M, Olbrich H, Kispert A, Ketelsen UP, North A, Heintz
N, Omran H (2004) Dysfunction of axonemal dynein heavy chain Mdnah5 inhibits ependymal
flow and reveals a novel mechanism for hydrocephalus formation. Hum Mol Genet
13:2133–2141.
Ikeda W, Nakanishi H, Miyoshi J, Mandai K, Ishizaki H, Tanaka M, Togawa A, Takahashi K,
Nishioka H, Yoshida H, Mizoguchi A, Nishikawa S, Takai Y (1999) Afadin: a key molecule
essential for structural organization of cell-cell junctions of polarized epithelia during embryogenesis. J Cell Biol 146:1117–1132.
Imai F, Hirai S, Akimoto K, Koyama H, Miyata T, Ogawa M, Noguchi S, Sasaoka T, Noda T, Ohno S
(2006) Inactivation of aPKClambda results in the loss of adherens junctions in neuroepithelial
cells without affecting neurogenesis in mouse neocortex. Development 133:1735–1744.
Imura T, Kornblum HI, Sofroniew MV (2003) The predominant neural stem cell isolated from
postnatal and adult forebrain but not early embryonic forebrain expresses GFAP. J Neurosci
23:2824–2832.
Jackson EL, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Gil-Perotin S, Roy M, Quinones-Hinojosa A, Vandenberg S,
Alvarez-Buylla A (2006) PDGFRalpha-positive B cells are neural stem cells in the adult SVZ
that form glioma-like growths in response to increased PDGF signaling. Neuron 51:187–199.
Jankovski A, Sotelo C (1996) Subventricular zone-olfactory bulb migratory pathway in the adult
mouse: cellular composition and specificity as determined by heterochronic and heterotopic
transplantation. J Comp Neurol 371:376–396.
Jiang J, McMurtry J, Niedzwiecki D, Goldman SA (1998) Insulin-like growth factor-1 is a radial
cell-associated neurotrophin that promotes neuronal recruitment from the adult songbird
ependyma/subependyma. J Neurobiol 36:1–15.
Johansson CB, Momma S, Clarke DL, Risling M, Lendahl U, Frisén J (1999) Identification of a
neural stem cell in the adult mammalian central nervous system. Cell 96:25–34.
Jones C, Roper VC, Foucher I, Qian D, Banizs B, Petit C, Yoder BK, Chen P (2008) Ciliary
proteins link basal body polarization to planar cell polarity regulation. Nat Genet 40:69–77.
Kaplan MS, Bell DH (1983) Neuronal proliferation in the 9-month-old rodent-radioautographic
study of granule cells in the hippocampus. Exp Brain Res 52:1.
Kaplan MS, Hinds JW (1977) Neurogenesis in the adult rat: electron microscopic analysis of light
radioautographs. Science 197:1092–1094.
Kelsch W, Mosley CP, Lin CW, Lois C (2007) Distinct mammalian precursors are committed to
generate neurons with defined dendritic projection patterns. PLoS Biol 5:e300.

312

Z. Mirzadeh et al.

Kerever A, Schnack J, Vellinga D, Ichikawa N, Moon C, Arikawa-Hirasawa E, Efird JT, Mercier F
(2007) Novel extracellular matrix structures in the neural stem cell niche capture the neurogenic
factor fibroblast growth factor 2 from the extracellular milieu. Stem Cells 25:2146–2157.
Kohwi M, Osumi N, Rubenstein JL, Alvarez-Buylla A (2005) Pax6 is required for making specific subpopulations of granule and periglomerular neurons in the olfactory bulb. J Neurosci 25:6997–7003.
Kohwi M, Petryniak MA, Long JE, Ekker M, Obata K, Yanagawa Y, Rubenstein JL, AlvarezBuylla A (2007) A subpopulation of olfactory bulb GABAergic interneurons is derived from
Emx1- and Dlx5/6-expressing progenitors. J Neurosci 27:6878–6891.
Kosodo Y, Roper K, Haubensak W, Marzesco AM, Corbeil D, Huttner WB (2004) Asymmetric
distribution of the apical plasma membrane during neurogenic divisions of mammalian
neuroepithelial cells. Embo J 23:2314–2324.
Kozminski KG, Beech PL, Rosenbaum JL (1995) The Chlamydomonas kinesin-like protein FLA10
is involved in motility associated with the flagellar membrane. J Cell Biol 131:1517–1527.
Kriegstein A, Alvarez-Buylla A (2009) The glial nature of embryonic and adult neural stem cells.
Annu Rev Neurosci 32:149–184.
Kuchler S, Graff MN, Gobaille S, Vincendon G, Roche AC, Delaunoy JP, Monsigny M, Zanetta
JP (1994) Mannose dependent tightening of the rat ependymal cell barrier. In vivo and in vitro
study using neoglycoproteins. Neurochem Int 24:43–55.
Kuhn HG, Winkler J, Kempermann G, Thal LJ, Gage FH (1997) Epidermal growth factor and
fibroblast growth factor-2 have different effects on neural progenitors in the adult rat brain.
J Neurosci 17:5820–5829.
Kuo CT, Mirzadeh Z, Soriano-Navarro M, Rasin M, Wang D, Shen J, Sestan N, Garcia-Verdugo J,
Alvarez-Buylla A, Jan LY, Jan YN (2006) Postnatal deletion of Numb/Numblike reveals repair
and remodeling capacity in the subventricular neurogenic niche. Cell 127:1253–1264.
Levitt P, Rakic P (1980) Immunoperoxidase localization of glial fibrillary acidic protein in radial
glial cells and astrocytes of the developing rhesus monkey brain. J Comp Neurol 193:815–840.
Lim DA, Alvarez-Buylla A (1999) Interaction between astrocytes and adult subventricular zone
precursors stimulates neurogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:7526–7531.
Lim DA, Tramontin AD, Trevejo JM, Herrera DG, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (2000)
Noggin antagonizes BMP signaling to create a niche for adult neurogenesis. Neuron 28:713–726.
Lin D, Edwards AS, Fawcett JP, Mbamalu G, Scott JD, Pawson T (2000) A mammalian PAR-3PAR-6 complex implicated in Cdc42/Rac1 and aPKC signalling and cell polarity. Nat Cell
Biol 2:540–547.
Lin F, Hiesberger T, Cordes K, Sinclair AM, Goldstein LS, Somlo S, Igarashi P (2003)
Kidney-specific inactivation of the KIF3A subunit of kinesin-II inhibits renal ciliogenesis and
produces polycystic kidney disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100:5286–5291.
Lindemann CB (2004) Testing the geometric clutch hypothesis. Biol Cell 96:681–690.
Liu Z, Martin LJ (2003) Olfactory bulb core is a rich source of neural progenitor and stem cells
in adult rodent and human. J Comp Neurol 459:368–391.
Liu A, Wang B, Niswander LA (2005) Mouse intraflagellar transport proteins regulate both the
activator and repressor functions of Gli transcription factors. Development 132:3103–3111.
Logan CY, Nusse R (2004) The Wnt signaling pathway in development and disease. Annu Rev
Cell Dev Biol 20:781–810.
Lois C, Alvarez-Buylla A (1993) Proliferating subventricular zone cells in the adult mammalian
forebrain can differentiate into neurons and glia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:2074–2077.
Lois C, Alvarez-Buylla A (1994) Long-distance neuronal migration in the adult mammalian brain.
Science 264:1145–1148.
Lois C, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (1996) Chain migration of neuronal precursors.
Science 271:978–981.
Luskin MB (1993) Restricted proliferation and migration of postnatally generated neurons derived
from the forebrain subventricular zone. Neuron 11:173–189.
Machold R, Hayashi S, Rutlin M, Muzumdar MD, Nery S, Corbin JG, Gritli-Linde A, Dellovade T,
Porter JA, Rubin LL, Dudek H, McMahon AP, Fishell G (2003) Sonic hedgehog is required
for progenitor cell maintenance in telencephalic stem cell niches. Neuron 39:937–950.

12  Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic Germinal Niches

313

Malatesta P, Hartfuss E, Gotz M (2000) Isolation of radial glial cells by fluorescent-activated cell
sorting reveals a neuronal lineage. Development 127:5253–5263.
Malatesta P, Hack MA, Hartfuss E, Kettenmann H, Klinkert W, Kirchhoff F, Gotz M (2003)
Neuronal or glial progeny: regional differences in radial glia fate. Neuron 37:751–764.
Manabe N, Hirai S, Imai F, Nakanishi H, Takai Y, Ohno S (2002) Association of ASIP/mPAR-3
with adherens junctions of mouse neuroepithelial cells. Dev Dyn 225:61–69.
Mancuso MR, Kuhnert F, Kuo CJ (2008) Developmental angiogenesis of the central nervous
system. Lymphat Res Biol 6:173–180.
Marshall WF (2008) The cell biological basis of ciliary disease. J Cell Biol 180:17–21.
Marshall WF, Rosenbaum JL (2001) Intraflagellar transport balances continuous turnover of outer
doublet microtubules: implications for flagellar length control. J Cell Biol 155:405–414.
Marszalek JR, Ruiz-Lozano P, Roberts E, Chien KR, Goldstein LS (1999) Situs inversus and
embryonic ciliary morphogenesis defects in mouse mutants lacking the KIF3A subunit of
kinesin-II. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:5043–5048.
Martin-Belmonte F, Mostov K (2008) Regulation of cell polarity during epithelial morphogenesis.
Curr Opin Cell Biol 20:227–234.
May SR, Ashique AM, Karlen M, Wang B, Shen Y, Zarbalis K, Reiter J, Ericson J, Peterson AS
(2005) Loss of the retrograde motor for IFT disrupts localization of Smo to cilia and prevents
the expression of both activator and repressor functions of Gli. Dev Biol 287:378–389.
Menn B, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Yaschine C, Gonzalez-Perez O, Rowitch D, Alvarez-Buylla A
(2006) Origin of oligodendrocytes in the subventricular zone of the adult brain. J Neurosci
26:7907–7918.
Mercier F, Kitasako JT, Hatton GI (2002) Anatomy of the brain neurogenic zones revisited: fractones
and the fibroblast/macrophage network. J Comp Neurol 451:170–188.
Merkle FT, Tramontin AD, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (2004) Radial glia give rise to
adult neural stem cells in the subventricular zone. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
101:17528–17532.
Merkle FT, Mirzadeh Z, Alvarez-Buylla A (2007) Mosaic organization of neural stem cells in the
adult brain. Science 317:381–384.
Mirzadeh Z, Han YG, Soriano-Navarro M, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (2010) Cilia
organize ependymal planar polarity. J Neurosci 30:2600–2610.
Mirzadeh Z, Merkle FT, Soriano-Navarro M, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (2008)
Neural stem cells confer unique pinwheel architecture to the ventricular surface in neurogenic
regions of the adult brain. Cell Stem Cell 3:265–278.
Misson JP, Edwards MA, Yamamoto M, Caviness VS, Jr.(1988) Mitotic cycling of radial glial
cells of the fetal murine cerebral wall: a combined autoradiographic and immunohistochemical
study. Dev Brain Res 38:183–190.
Mitchell B, Jacobs R, Li J, Chien S, Kintner C (2007) A positive feedback mechanism governs
the polarity and motion of motile cilia. Nature 447:97–101.
Miyata T, Kawaguchi A, Okano H, Ogawa M (2001) Asymmetric inheritance of radial glial fibers
by cortical neurons. Neuron 31:727–741.
Mollgard K, Balslev Y, Lauritzen B, Saunders NR (1987) Cell junctions and membrane specializations in the ventricular zone (germinal matrix) of the developing sheep brain: a CSF-brain
barrier. J Neurocytol 16:433–444.
Morshead CM, Reynolds BA, Craig CG, McBurney MW, Staines WA, Morassutti D, Weiss S, van
der Kooy D (1994) Neural stem cells in the adult mammalian forebrain: a relatively quiescent
subpopulation of subependymal cells. Neuron 13:1071–1082.
Munro EM (2006) PAR proteins and the cytoskeleton: a marriage of equals. Curr Opin Cell Biol
18:86–94.
Murdoch JN, Henderson DJ, Doudney K, Gaston-Massuet C, Phillips HM, Paternotte C, Arkell R,
Stanier P, Copp AJ (2003) Disruption of scribble (Scrb1) causes severe neural tube defects in
the circletail mouse. Hum Mol Genet 12:87–98.
Nadarajah B, Jones AM, Evans WH, Parnavelas JG (1997) Differential expression of connexins
during neocortical development and neuronal circuit formation. J Neurosci 17:3096–3111.

314

Z. Mirzadeh et al.

Noctor SC, Flint AC, Weissman TA, Dammerman RS, Kriegstein AR (2001) Neurons derived
from radial glial cells establish radial units in neocortex. Nature 409:714–720.
Noctor SC, Martinez-Cerdeno V, Ivic L, Kriegstein AR (2004) Cortical neurons arise in symmetric
and asymmetric division zones and migrate through specific phases. Nat Neurosci 7:136–144.
Noctor SC, Martinez-Cerdeno V, Kriegstein AR (2007) Contribution of intermediate progenitor
cells to cortical histogenesis. Arch Neurol 64:639–642.
Noctor SC, Martinez-Cerdeno V, Kriegstein AR (2008) Distinct behaviors of neural stem and
progenitor cells underlie cortical neurogenesis. J Comp Neurol 508:28–44.
Nonaka S, Tanaka Y, Okada Y, Takeda S, Harada A, Kanai Y, Kido M, Hirokawa N (1998)
Randomization of left-right asymmetry due to loss of nodal cilia generating leftward flow of
extraembryonic fluid in mice lacking KIF3B motor protein. Cell 95:829–837.
Nottebohm F (2004) The road we travelled: discovery, choreography, and significance of brain
replaceable neurons. Ann NY Acad Sci 1016:628.
Nyfeler Y, Kirch RD, Mantei N, Leone DP, Radtke F, Suter U, Taylor V (2005) Jagged1 signals
in the postnatal subventricular zone are required for neural stem cell self-renewal. Embo J
24:3504–3515.
Ocbina PJ, Tuson M, Anderson KV (2009) Primary cilia are not required for normal canonical
Wnt signaling in the mouse embryo. PLoS One 4:e6839.
Ooshio T, Fujita N, Yamada A, Sato T, Kitagawa Y, Okamoto R, Nakata S, Miki A, Irie K, Takai Y
(2007) Cooperative roles of Par-3 and afadin in the formation of adherens and tight junctions.
J Cell Sci 120:2352–2365.
Palma V, Lim DA, Dahmane N, Sanchez P, Brionne TC, Herzberg CD, Gitton Y, Carleton A,
Alvarez-Buylla A, Ruiz i Altaba A (2005) Sonic hedgehog controls stem cell behavior in the
postnatal and adult brain. Development 132:335–344.
Palmer TD, Willhoite AR, Gage FH (2000) Vascular niche for adult hippocampal neurogenesis.
J Comp Neurol 425:479–494.
Park TJ, Haigo SL, Wallingford JB (2006) Ciliogenesis defects in embryos lacking inturned or
fuzzy function are associated with failure of planar cell polarity and Hedgehog signaling. Nat
Genet 38:303–311.
Parras CM, Galli R, Britz O, Soares S, Galichet C, Battiste J, Johnson JE, Nakafuku M, Vescovi
A, Guillemot F (2004) Mash1 specifies neurons and oligodendrocytes in the postnatal brain.
Embo J 23:4495–4505.
Paton JA, Nottebohm F (1984) Neurons generated in the adult brain are recruited into functional
circuits. Science 225:1046–1048.
Pazour GJ, Wilkerson CG, Witman GB (1998) A dynein light chain is essential for the retrograde
particle movement of intraflagellar transport (IFT). J Cell Biol 141:979–992.
Pencea V, Bingaman KD, Freedman LJ, Luskin MB (2001) Neurogenesis in the subventricular zone
and rostral migratory stream of the neonatal and adult primate forebrain. Exp Neurol 172:1–16.
Peretto P, Merighi A, Fasolo A, Bonfanti L (1997) Glial tubes in the rostral migratory stream of
the adult rat. Brain Res Bull 42:9–21.
Peretto P, Dati C, De Marchis S, Kim HH, Ukhanova M, Fasolo A, Margolis FL (2004) Expression
of the secreted factors noggin and bone morphogenetic proteins in the subependymal layer and
olfactory bulb of the adult mouse brain. Neuroscience 128:685–696.
Peretto P, Giachino C, Aimar P, Fasolo A, Bonfanti L (2005) Chain formation and glial tube
assembly in the shift from neonatal to adult subventricular zone of the rodent forebrain.
J Comp Neurol 487:407–427.
Petreanu L, Alvarez-Buylla A (2002) Maturation and death of adult-born olfactory bulb granule
neurons: role of olfaction. J Neurosci 22:6106–6113.
Pixley SKR, De Vellis J (1984) Transition between immature radial glia and mature astrocytes
studied with a monoclonal antibody to vimentin. Dev Brain Res 15:201–209.
Pleasure SJ, Collins AE, Lowenstein DH (2000) Unique expression patterns of cell fate molecules
delineate sequential stages of dentate gyrus development. J Neurosci 20:6095–6105.

12  Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic Germinal Niches

315

Qin H, Diener DR, Geimer S, Cole DG, Rosenbaum JL (2004) Intraflagellar transport (IFT) cargo:
IFT transports flagellar precursors to the tip and turnover products to the cell body. J Cell Biol
164:255–266.
Rakic P (1972) Mode of cell migration to the superficial layers of fetal monkey neocortex. J Comp
Neurol 145:61–84.
Rakic P (1985) Limits of neurogenesis in primates. Science 227:1054–1056.
Rasin MR, Gazula VR, Breunig JJ, Kwan KY, Johnson MB, Liu-Chen S, Li HS, Jan LY, Jan YN,
Rakic P, Sestan N (2007) Numb and Numbl are required for maintenance of cadherin-based
adhesion and polarity of neural progenitors. Nat Neurosci 10:819–827.
Reynolds B, Weiss S (1992) Generation of neurons and astrocytes from isolated cells of the adult
mammalian central nervous system. Science 255:1707–1710.
Rickmann M, Amaral DG, Cowan WM (1987) Organization of radial glial cells during the
development of the rat dentate gyrus. J Comp Neurol 264:449–479.
Rieder CL, Faruki S, Khodjakov A (2001) The centrosome in vertebrates: more than a microtubuleorganizing center. Trends Cell Biol 11:413–419.
Rohatgi R, Milenkovic L, Scott MP (2007) Patched1 regulates hedgehog signaling at the primary
cilium. Science 317:372–376.
Rosenbaum JL, Witman GB (2002) Intraflagellar transport. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 3:813–825.
Ross AJ et al. (2005) Disruption of Bardet-Biedl syndrome ciliary proteins perturbs planar cell
polarity in vertebrates. Nat Genet 37:1135–1140.
Russo RE, Fernandez A, Reali C, Radmilovich M, Trujillo-Cenoz O (2004) Functional and
molecular clues reveal precursor-like cells and immature neurones in the turtle spinal cord.
J Physiol 560:831–838.
Satir P (1965) Studies on cilia. II. Examination of the distal region of the ciliary shaft and the role
of the filaments in motility. J Cell Biol 26:805–834.
Satir P, Christensen ST (2007) Overview of structure and function of mammalian cilia. Annu Rev
Physiol 69:377–400.
Satir P, Dirksen ER (1985) Function-structure correlations in cilia from mammalian respiratory
tract. In: Handbook of Physiology – The Respiratory System (Fishman AP, Cherniak NS,
Widdicombe JG, Gieger SR, eds), pp 473–494. Bethesda: American Physiological Society.
Sauer FC (1935) Mitosis in the neural tube. J Comp Neurol 62:377–405.
Saura J, Richards JG, Mahy N (1994) Differential age-related changes of MAO-A and MAO-B in
mouse brain and peripheral organs. Neurobiol Aging 15:399–408.
Sawamoto K, Wichterle H, Gonzalez-Perez O, Cholfin JA, Yamada M, Spassky N, Murcia NS, GarciaVerdugo JM, Marin O, Rubenstein JL, Tessier-Lavigne M, Okano H, Alvarez-Buylla A (2006) New
neurons follow the flow of cerebrospinal fluid in the adult brain. Science 311:629–632.
Schmechel DE, Rakic P (1979) A Golgi study of radial glia cells in developing monkey telencephalon: morphogenesis and transformation into astrocytes. Anat Embryol 156:115–152.
Schoenwolf GC, Alvarez IS (1989) Roles of neuroepithelial cell rearrangement and division in
shaping of the avian neural plate. Development 106:427–439.
Schoenwolf GC, Smith JL (2000) Mechanisms of neurulation. Methods Mol Biol 136:125–134.
Seaberg RM, van der Kooy D (2002) Adult rodent neurogenic regions: the ventricular subependyma contains neural stem cells, but the dentate gyrus contains restricted progenitors.
J Neurosci 22:1784–1793.
Seri B, Alvarez-Buylla A (2002) Neural stem cells and the regulation of neurogenesis in the adult
hippocampus. Clin Neurosci Res 2:11–16.
Seri B, Garcia-Verdugo JM, McEwen BS, Alvarez-Buylla A (2001) Astrocytes give rise to new
neurons in the adult mammalian hippocampus. J Neurosci 21:7153–7160.
Seri B, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Collado-Morente L, McEwen BS, Alvarez-Buylla A (2004) Cell
types, lineage, and architecture of the germinal zone in the adult dentate gyrus. J Comp Neurol
478:359–378.
Seri B, Herrera DG, Gritti A, Ferron S, Collado L, Vescovi A, Garcia-Verdugo JM, AlvarezBuylla A (2006) Composition and organization of the SCZ: a large germinal layer

316

Z. Mirzadeh et al.

containing neural stem cells in the adult mammalian brain. Cereb Cortex 16 Suppl
1:i103–111.
Shen Q, Goderie SK, Jin L, Karanth N, Sun Y, Abramova N, Vincent P, Pumiglia K, Temple S
(2004) Endothelial cells stimulate self-renewal and expand neurogenesis of neural stem cells.
Science 304:1338–1340.
Shen Q, Wang Y, Kokovay E, Lin G, Chuang SM, Goderie SK, Roysam B, Temple S (2008) Adult
SVZ stem cells lie in a vascular niche: a quantitative analysis of niche cell-cell interactions.
Cell Stem Cell 3:289–300.
Shibata T, Yamada K, Watanabe M, Ikenaka K, Wada K, Tanaka K, Inoue Y (1997) Glutamate
transporter GLAST is expressed in the radial glia-astrocyte lineage of developing mouse spinal
cord. J Neurosci 17:9212–9219.
Shingo T, Gregg C, Enwere E, Fujikawa H, Hassam R, Geary C, Cross JC, Weiss S (2003)
Pregnancy-stimulated neurogenesis in the adult female forebrain mediated by prolactin.
Science 299:117–120.
Simons M, Mlodzik M (2008) Planar cell polarity signaling: from fly development to human
disease. Annu Rev Genet 42:517–540.
Simons M, Gloy J, Ganner A, Bullerkotte A, Bashkurov M, Kronig C, Schermer B, Benzing T,
Cabello OA, Jenny A, Mlodzik M, Polok B, Driever W, Obara T, Walz G (2005) Inversin, the
gene product mutated in nephronophthisis type II, functions as a molecular switch between
Wnt signaling pathways. Nat Genet 37:537–543.
Singla V, Reiter JF (2006) The primary cilium as the cell’s antenna: signaling at a sensory organelle. Science 313:629–633.
Spassky N, Merkle FT, Flames N, Tramontin AD, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (2005)
Adult ependymal cells are postmitotic and are derived from radial glial cells during embryogenesis. J Neurosci 25:10–18.
Spassky N, Han YG, Aguilar A, Strehl L, Besse L, Laclef C, Ros MR, Garcia-Verdugo JM,
Alvarez-Buylla A (2008) Primary cilia are required for cerebellar development and Shhdependent expansion of progenitor pool. Dev Biol 317:246–259.
Summers KE, Gibbons IR (1971) Adenosine triphosphate-induced sliding of tubules in trypsintreated flagella of sea urchin sperm. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 68:3092–3096.
Sun Y, Goderie SK, Temple S (2005) Asymmetric distribution of EGFR receptor during mitosis
generates diverse CNS progenitor cells. Neuron 45:873–886.
Sundholm-Peters NL, Yang HK, Goings GE, Walker AS, Szele FG (2004) Radial glia-like cells
at the base of the lateral ventricles in adult mice. J Neurocytol 33:153–164.
Takeda S, Yonekawa Y, Tanaka Y, Okada Y, Nonaka S, Hirokawa N (1999) Left-right asymmetry
and kinesin superfamily protein KIF3A: new insights in determination of laterality and mesoderm induction by kif3A-/- mice analysis. J Cell Biol 145:825–836.
Takeichi M (1995) Morphogenetic roles of classic cadherins. Curr Opin Cell Biol 7:619–627.
Tamamaki N, Nakamura K, Okamoto K, Kaneko T (2001) Radial glia is a progenitor of neocortical
neurons in the developing cerebral cortex. Neurosci Res 41:51–60.
Tavazoie M, Van der Veken L, Silva-Vargas V, Louissaint M, Colonna L, Zaidi B, Garcia-Verdugo
JM, Doetsch F (2008) A specialized vascular niche for adult neural stem cells. Cell Stem Cell
3:279–288.
Tramontin AD, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Lim DA, Alvarez-Buylla A (2003) Postnatal development of
radial glia and the ventricular zone (VZ): a continuum of the neural stem cell compartment.
Cereb Cortex 13:580–587.
Tran PV, Haycraft CJ, Besschetnova TY, Turbe-Doan A, Stottmann RW, Herron BJ, Chesebro AL,
Qiu H, Scherz PJ, Shah JV, Yoder BK, Beier DR (2008) THM1 negatively modulates mouse
sonic hedgehog signal transduction and affects retrograde intraflagellar transport in cilia. Nat
Genet 40:403–410.
Tropepe V, Sibilia M, Ciruna BG, Rossant J, Wagner EF, van der Kooy D (1999) Distinct neural
stem cells proliferate in response to EGF and FGF in the developing mouse telencephalon. Dev
Biol 208:166–188.

12  Epithelial Organization of Adult Neurogenic Germinal Niches

317

The Boulder Committee B (1970) Embryonic vertebrate central nervous system: revised terminology.
Anat Rec 166:257–262.
Tung T-C, Tung Y-FY (1940) Experimental studies on the determination of polarity of ciliary
action of anuran embryos. Arch Biol (Liege) 51:203–218.
Twitty VC (1928) Experimental studies on the ciliary action of amphibian embryos. J Exp Zool
50:310–344.
van Praag H, Schinder AF, Christie BR, Toni N, Palmer TD, Gage FH (2002) Functional neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus. Nature 415:1030–1034.
Veeman MT, Axelrod JD, Moon RT (2003) A second canon. Functions and mechanisms of betacatenin-independent Wnt signaling. Dev Cell 5:367–377.
Ventura RE, Goldman JE (2007) Dorsal radial glia generate olfactory bulb interneurons in the
postnatal murine brain. J Neurosci 27:4297–4302.
Voigt T (1989) Development of glial cells in the cerebral wall of ferrets: direct tracing of their
transformation from radial glia into astrocytes. J Comp Neurol 289:74–88.
von Trotha JW, Campos-Ortega JA, Reugels AM (2006) Apical localization of ASIP/PAR3:EGFP in zebrafish neuroepithelial cells involves the oligomerization domain CR1, the PDZ
domains, and the C-terminal portion of the protein. Dev Dyn 235:967–977.
Wallingford JB (2006) Planar cell polarity, ciliogenesis and neural tube defects. Hum Mol Genet
15 Spec No 2:R227–234.
Wallingford JB, Harland RM (2002) Neural tube closure requires Dishevelled-dependent convergent extension of the midline. Development 129:5815–5825.
Wallingford JB, Rowning BA, Vogeli KM, Rothbacher U, Fraser SE, Harland RM (2000)
Dishevelled controls cell polarity during Xenopus gastrulation. Nature 405:81–85.
Wang X, Tsai JW, Imai JH, Lian WN, Vallee RB, Shi SH (2009) Asymmetric centrosome inheritance maintains neural progenitors in the neocortex. Nature 461:947–955.
Weigmann A, Corbeil D, Hellwig A, Huttner WB (1997) Prominin, a novel microvilli-specific
polytopic membrane protein of the apical surface of epithelial cells, is targeted to plasmalemmal protrusions of non-epithelial cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:12425–12430.
Weissman TA, Riquelme PA, Ivic L, Flint AC, Kriegstein AR (2004) Calcium waves propagate through
radial glial cells and modulate proliferation in the developing neocortex. Neuron 43:647–661.
Williams D, Gascoigne JE, Street M, Williams ED (1979) Histochemical characterization of
monoamine oxidase in ependyma of rat hypothalamus. Histochem J 11:83–95.
Wodarz A, Huttner WB (2003) Asymmetric cell division during neurogenesis in Drosophila and
vertebrates. Mech Dev 120:1297–1309.
Wong SY, Seol AD, So PL, Ermilov AN, Bichakjian CK, Epstein EH, Jr., Dlugosz AA, Reiter JF
(2009) Primary cilia can both mediate and suppress Hedgehog pathway-dependent tumorigenesis. Nat Med 15:1055–1061.
Worthington WC, Jr., Cathcart RS, 3rd (1963) Ependymal cilia: distribution and activity in the
adult human brain. Science 139:221–222.
Wu J, Mlodzik M (2009) A quest for the mechanism regulating global planar cell polarity of
tissues. Trends Cell Biol 19:295–305.
Yu JM, Kim JH, Song GS, Jung JS (2006) Increase in proliferation and differentiation of neural
progenitor cells isolated from postnatal and adult mice brain by Wnt-3a and Wnt-5a. Mol Cell
Biochem 288:17–28.
Zallen JA (2007) Planar polarity and tissue morphogenesis. Cell 129:1051–1063.
Zhadanov AB, Provance DW, Jr., Speer CA, Coffin JD, Goss D, Blixt JA, Reichert CM, Mercer
JA (1999) Absence of the tight junctional protein AF-6 disrupts epithelial cell-cell junctions
and cell polarity during mouse development. Curr Biol 9:880–888.
Zhao C, Deng W, Gage FH (2008) Mechanisms and functional implications of adult neurogenesis.
Cell 132:645–660.
Zupanc GK (2006) Neurogenesis and neuronal regeneration in the adult fish brain. J Comp
Physiol A Neuroethol Sens Neural Behav Physiol 192:649–670.

Chapter 13

Neurogenesis in the Adult Rabbit:
From Olfactory System to Cerebellum
Giovanna Ponti, Federico Luzzati, Paolo Peretto, and Luca Bonfanti

Abstract  Adult neurogenesis is a feature that is phylogenetically highly conserved,
yet most of the current knowledge in this field is based on laboratory rodents.
In addition to the differences among vertebrates, remarkable peculiarities are also
emerging in the location and structural and functional features of neurogenic
­systems in mammals. Although the orders Lagomorpha and Rodentia are quite
similar, unexpected features of structural plasticity and neurogenesis have been
found to occur in the rabbit central nervous system. The structural and temporal
characteristics of protracted and persistent neurogenesis in rabbits are herewith
addressed. Attention is focused on the subventricular zone cytoarchitecture and
extensions, as well as on processes of persistent neurogenesis that have been
recently demonstrated to occur in the striatum and in the cerebellum. The existence
of neural cell progenitors persisting within the rabbit brain parenchyma (so-called
nonneurogenic in rodents) are discussed.

13.1 Introduction
The New Zealand white rabbit (Orictolagus cuniculus) belongs to the lagomorphs
(order Lagomorpha), forming a distinct group compared with rodents (order
Rodentia), within the monophyletic group of Glires (Douzery and Huchon 2004).

G. Ponti and L. Bonfanti (*)
Department of Veterinary Morphophysiology, University of Turin, Turin, Italy
e-mail: luca.bonfanti@unito.it
F. Luzzati and P. Peretto
Department of Animal and Human Biology, University of Turin, Turin, Italy
P. Peretto and L. Bonfanti 
National Institute of Neuroscience-Italy (INN), Turin, Italy
G. Ponti, F. Luzzati, P. Peretto, and L. Bonfanti 
Istituto scientifico Fondazione Cavalieri Ottolenghi, Turin, Italy
T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_13, © Springer 2011

319

320

G. Ponti et al.

Rabbits, in addition to being domestic, are also laboratory animals, yet in contrast
with the deep knowledge of mouse and rat neuroanatomy only a few studies have
addressed the same issue in lagomorphs systematically, making it difficult to set up
detailed comparative considerations.
During recent years, by focusing on the anatomical structure and neural progenitor
activity in postnatal germinative regions of the rabbit brain, we have described the
localization, organization, and expansion of germinal matrices, showing relevant
anatomical and functional differences between lagomorphs and rodents (see
Bonfanti and Ponti 2008; Luzzati et al. 2007). In addition to differences concerning
the “classic” neurogenic sites, such as the subventricular zone (SVZ) and the subgranular zone (SGZ; Gage 2000), these studies led us to the discovery that rabbit
neurogenesis is more widespread, being also detectable in other regions of the
­central nervous system (CNS), commonly referred to in rodents as “nonneurogenic” parenchyma.
Some peculiar features concerning rabbit brain anatomy should be considered
with respect to rodents: the occurrence of more prominent cerebral ventricular
extensions and more expanded temporal lobes. Differences in the overall mammalian brain anatomy can be related to a different shape and extension of the
cerebral ventricles, which in turn correlates well with that of the embryonic
­germinal matrices, thus potentially reflecting changes of configuration and size
of the adult brain (McFarland et  al. 1969; Chenn and Walsh 2002; Kriegstein
et al. 2006; Fig. 13.1a). The persistence of the olfactory ventricle during postnatal
life in rabbits, such as in other mammals (dogs, cats, cows, sheep, guinea pig,
humans; McFarland et  al. 1969; Leonhardt 1972; Rodriguez-Perez et  al. 2003;
Curtis et al. 2007), does not seem to be related to brain size because the olfactory
ventricle is replaced by a solid chord of tissue in most rodents and primates
(McFarland et  al. 1969; Leonhardt 1972). Consequently, the tissue forming the
rostral migratory stream (RMS) in these latter species is replaced in rabbits by a
SVZ rostral extension ensheathing the dorsal part of the olfactory ventricle
(Fig. 13.1b,c). Another extension of the lateral ventricular system called the inferior horn and protruding ventrally within the temporal lobe, absent in rodents but
present in rabbits and primates, correlates well with the expanded temporal lobes
of these species (McFarland et al. 1969; Leonhardt 1972; Fig. 13.1a). This trend
is confirmed by the occurrence of a posterior horn in species with massive development of the occipital lobes and high degree of visual specialization, maximally
evident in primates and humans.
In the first part of this chapter, the overall anatomy and cytoarchitecture of
the rabbit SVZ are compared with current well-established knowledge in rodents.
Most interestingly, in the second part of the chapter we describe the occurrence of
spontaneous neurogenic activity in the mature rabbit striatum (Luzzati et al. 2006)
and cerebellum (Ponti et  al. 2006a, 2008), two CNS regions that are considered
nonneurogenic under physiological condition in mammals. In particular, the local
origin of newly born neural cells from parenchymal (striatal and cerebellar)
­progenitors is discussed.

13  Neurogenesis in the Adult Rabbit

321

Fig. 13.1  Organization of the rabbit subventricular zone (SVZ) and its extensions. (a) The lateral
ventricle (LV) shows an open olfactory ventricle (ov) and an inferior horn (ih), the latter in correspondence with an enlarged temporal lobe (arrowhead). (b) Large chains of neuroblasts in the
abventricular SVZ and in the anterior forceps (AF) of the corpus callosum. SVZ area in dark gray.
(c) Parenchymal chains (black) leave the SVZ at the level of the rostral extension (RE) and the
ventral lateral extension (VLE). (B1, B2) Ultrastructure of the large SVZ and parenchymal chains
(Ch): bv blood vessel, Ast astrocyte, Ax axons, asterisk type C-like cell. (d) Ultrastructure of the
stem cell niche at the LV level. e Ependyma, a type A cells, b type B cells (astrocytes); these latter form a ribbon, rather than glial tubes

322

G. Ponti et al.

13.2 Anatomy and Cytoarchitecture of the Rabbit SVZ
The overall anatomy of the rabbit SVZ adapts somewhat to the ventricular
conformation. The SVZ region (defined as an area wherein cell proliferation,
chains of neuroblasts, and an astrocytic meshwork do overlap) (Luzzati et al. 2003;
Ponti et al. 2006b) extends from the lateral wall of the lateral ventricle to the olfactory
bulb, lining the dorsal part of the olfactory ventricle (rostral extension; Fig. 13.1b,c).
From the posterior part of the lateral ventricle, a ventral lateral extension (VLE;
Luzzati et al. 2003) lines the inferior horn of the ventricular cavity (Fig. 13.1c).
On examining the internal arrangement of the New Zealand white rabbit SVZ,
three main differences can be found in comparison with rodents (see Ponti et  al.
2006b): (1) a heterogeneous distribution of the chain and glia compartments; (2) the
simultaneous occurrence of isolated neuroblasts and very large chains; and (3) a
looser astrocytic meshwork. Thus, two distinct parts can be detected: a ventricular
SVZ, adjacent to the ventricular wall, containing small aggregates of neuroblasts,
and an abventricular SVZ, detached from the ventricles, containing large chains of
neuroblasts immersed in a loose astrocytic network (Fig.  13.1b). About 10–20
medium to large chains are visible, some of which include up to 15 to 20 nucleated
cells in transverse section (see Fig. 13.1B1). The distinction between rabbit ventricular and abventricular SVZ is reinforced by a thick band of tissue, poor in cells
and enriched in nerve fibers and glial processes, reminiscent of the hypocellular
gap of the human SVZ (Quinones-Hinojosa et  al. 2006). Another feature shared
with humans is the absence of well-organized glial tubes, replaced by an incomplete astrocyte row (Fig. 13.1d), quite similar to the astrocyte ribbon (Sanai et al.
2004). Yet, in contrast to the human SVZ, most of the rabbit neuroblasts form large
chains located laterally to both the astrocyte ribbon and hypocellular tissue (Ponti
et al. 2006b; Fig. 13.1b,d).
The finding of a similar pattern in the bovine SVZ (Rodriguez-Perez et al. 2003)
suggests that in nonrodent mammals the glial meshwork could be less tightly
packed than in rodents and the SVZ differently compartmentalized, which could be
a shared feature in brains characterized by larger size. However, a striking difference between rabbit and human SVZ consists of large chains in the rabbit abventricular SVZ, in contrast with the absence of evident chains in humans (Sanai et al.
2004; Quinones-Hinojosa et al. 2006; Curtis et al. 2007).
Although a certain degree of heterogeneity in the arrangement of SVZ compartments has been described in rodents, involving medial/lateral asymmetry and even
rat/mouse species differences (Peretto et al. 2005), the rabbit appears substantially
different as to the kind of contact between the newly generated cell precursors
and their substrates. Instead of an almost complete glial ensheathment (the glial
tubes of rodents; Peretto et al. 1997), chains of the rabbit abventricular SVZ are in
contact with three types of substrates – astrocytic glia, blood vessels, and axons – the
latter representing the highest percentage (Ponti et al. 2006b; Fig. 13.1B1). Also,
the postnatal assembly of the rabbit SVZ differs. Indeed, although SVZ chains are
not present in rodents at birth, appearing later around the third postnatal week

13  Neurogenesis in the Adult Rabbit

323

(Peretto et al. 2005), chain formation is observed very early in rabbits, starting from
postnatal day 10 (Ponti et al. 2006b; Fig. 13.2a). Such a difference is strengthened
by the different temporal shift in postnatal development, which is earlier in rodents
(puberty occurs in the first to second postnatal months) than in rabbits (around the
fourth month).
The ultrastructural analysis of the periventricular SVZ, where the stem cell niche
is expected to occur (see Chap. 12), revealed the same cell types described in
rodents, although with a different spatial organization (Fig.  13.1d). Again, the
absence of glial tubes in the rabbit ventricular SVZ, along with the occurrence of
astrocytes forming a row parallel to the ependyma, makes this structure somehow
more similar to the human stem cell niche, at least under the morphological profile
(Sanai et al. 2004; Quinones-Hinojosa et al. 2006; Bonfanti and Ponti 2008).
Thus, both chain and glia compartments can differ as to their architecture and
mutual relationships in relatively closely related mammalian orders, namely, lagomorphs and rodents. In parallel, common features can be shared by relatively distant
species, such as rabbits and humans.
Quantitative and qualitative studies carried out after bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)
systemic administration and cell tracer green (CTG) intraventricular injection
(see Luzzati et al. 2003, 2006) indicate that the different structural organization of
the rabbit SVZ seems not to affect cell migration toward the olfactory bulb.
Neuroblasts generated at the SVZ periventricular level appear to reach the core of
the olfactory bulb in 7–10 days. At 1 month survival time, several newly generated
cells have radially migrated in the olfactory bulb granular and glomerular layers,
whereby they have differentiated into NeuN-positive mature neurons. It is worth
noting that at this survival time several newly generated neurons are still located in
periventricular position (Ponti and Luzzati, unpublished results). Accordingly, this
pattern of migration is placed between the fast cell displacement described in
rodents (about 2 weeks to reach the final destination into the olfactory bulb layers;
Lois and Alvarez-Buylla 1994) and the far more slow pattern observed in primates
(about 3 months; Kornack and Rakic 2001).

13.2.1 SVZ Extensions Within the Rabbit Brain Parenchyma
Besides its peculiar cytoarchitecture, the rabbit SVZ is characterized by the
occurrence of extensions entering the surrounding mature parenchyma (Figs. 13.1b,c
and 13.2a,c). These parenchymal chains were identified after serial reconstruction
of brain tissue sections immunostained for the polysialylated form of the neural
cell adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM). Two groups of chain-like aggregates can
be observed: (1) anterior chains, leaving the SVZ rostral extension through the
anterior forceps of the corpus callosum, beneath the frontal cortex, and (2) posterior
chains, apparently leaving the ventral–lateral extension, along the external capsule
(Luzzati et al. 2003).

324

G. Ponti et al.

13  Neurogenesis in the Adult Rabbit

325

The real nature of migrating chains has been confirmed by ultrastructural serial
reconstruction, BrdU treatment analyzed at different postinjection survival times,
and confocal analysis after intraventricu lar injection of tracers (Luzzati et al. 2003,
2006; Ponti et al. 2006b; Figs. 13.1c, B2 and 13.2a–c). Immunoreactivity for PSANCAM and doublecortin on these tangentially oriented bulks of cells along with
ultrastructural features displayed by their cellular components are both features of
“chain migration” (Lois et  al. 1996). Cell migration from the SVZ within the
anterior chains has been confirmed by intraventricular injections of CTG (Luzzati
et  al. 2006). No mitoses or BrdU+ proliferating cells are detectable within the
parenchymal chains, yet the occurrence of newly generated cells can be observed
5–10 days after BrdU incorporation (Fig. 13.2b). By contrast, the intraventricular
injections of tracers failed to stain any posterior chains cells up to 9 days of survival
time. These data indicate that anterior chains contain migratory cells that are generated within the SVZ, whereas posterior chains could be made up of locally generated
elements characterized by inconstant relationships with the SVZ or scarce migratory capacity.
Similar to abventricular SVZ chains, parenchymal chains are very large, abundantly surpassing the average size of chains found in rodents (usually limited to 3–5
cells in cross section). The compact morphology of anterior chains (Fig. 13.1B2) is
consistently different from the more irregular, laminar arrangement of the posterior
ones, made up of noncontinuous clusters and rows of cells (Ponti et al. 2006b).
In contrast to SVZ chains of rodents, the rabbit parenchymal chains are glia independent, being directly in contact with axons (anterior chains; Fig. 13.1B2) or at
the interface between white and gray matter (posterior chains). Anterior chains
show continuity with large chains of the abventricular SVZ, in some cases following
blood vessels in their shift from the SVZ to white matter (Ponti et al. 2006b).
The occurrence of rabbit anterior parenchymal chains is mainly limited to postnatal/young ages and is highly variable in different individuals. Interestingly, newly
generated neurons have been proposed to exist in the frontal neocortex of adult
monkeys and rats (Gould et al. 1999, 2001), and migrating neuroblasts have been
observed in the corpus callosum of these species. These data open the possibility
that rabbit anterior parenchymal chains could represent a migratory pathway
providing new neurons in cortical or callosal regions of mammals in young individuals. Nevertheless, in spite of the presence of some PSA-NCAM+ cells with the
Fig. 13.2  Anterior parenchymal chains in the corpus callosum (CC) are already present postnatally
(postnatal day 10, P10; a) and still detectable at 6 months of age (P180; c). They contain migrating
neuroblasts as shown by intraventricular injection of bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU; b) and cell tracergreen (CTG; c). (a) Red doublecortin (DCX); green vimentin; (b) red polysialylated neural cell
adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM); green BrdU (5 days post injection). These chains are frequently
associated with blood vessels (bv). LV lateral ventricle. (d) Neurogenic sequence in the adult rabbit
caudate nucleus. BLBP brain lipid-binding protein. (e–g) Subpial layer (SPL) on the cerebellar surface of the peripuberal rabbit. Chains of neuroblasts form after cell division: green, BrdU after 2 h
(f) and 5 days (g) post injection; red, PSA. (h) The SPL is present on the whole subpial surface (blue)
but not in the roof of the fourth ventricle (IV, green). After the fifth month of life, newly generated
cells are detectable in the whole cerebellar cortex even in the absence of SPL (cs cortical surface).
Neuronal-like (L) and glial-like cell precursors (M) occur in both the peripuberal and adult rabbit

326

G. Ponti et al.

typical bipolar-shaped morphology of migrating elements, radially oriented in the
cortical/subcortical areas adjacent to parenchymal chains, no newly generated
neurons are detectable in the cortex, apart from rare newly born cells occasionally
detected in the amygdala and posterior putamen of rabbits 1 month after BrdU
treatment (Luzzati et  al. 2003). Although it is very unlikely that such alternative
routes could provide functional cell addition or renewal in the brain parenchyma,
their existence in peripuberal rabbits indicates how SVZ structural plasticity could
be heterogeneous in different mammals, appearing particularly protracted in young
lagomorphs.

13.3 Local Neurogenesis Independent from Persistent
Germinal Layers
13.3.1 Adult Striatal Neurogenesis
Another intriguing feature of the adult rabbit brain is the occurrence of newly
formed neurons in the caudate nucleus (Luzzati et al. 2006). This region represents
the most mediodorsal part of the corpus striatum, and it is generally considered
nonneurogenic during postnatal life under physiological conditions.
By using BrdU injections coupled to confocal analyses performed at different
survival times from the treatment, the genesis of new neurons can be demonstrated
in the caudate nucleus of sexually mature and adult animals. Stereological timecourse studies indicate that BrdU/NeuN-positive cells are detectable at long survival
times, although after 2 months only 0.7% of surviving BrdU+ cells actually correspond to mature neurons (Luzzati et  al. 2006). Phenotypic analyses showed that
about one-sixth of these cells differentiate into the calretinin striatal interneurons, a
number that is extremely low but nonnegligible if referred to the whole striatal
calretinin interneuronal population (see also Luzzati et  al. 2007). This finding
suggests that adult striatal neurogenesis is partly devoted to replacing and/or adding
cells within a small subpopulation of interneurons.
By contrast, the immunocytochemical analysis of early neuronal markers (i.e.,
PSA-NCAM and doublecortin) shows that the rabbit caudate nucleus harbors a
significant presence of newly generated neuroblasts. Interestingly, at 65 days, the
NeuN+/BrdU+ neurons represent less than 10% of the mean number of the doublecortin+/BrdU+ cells found at 5 days survival, thus indicating the occurrence of
a strong selection. Newly generated neuroblasts are frequently associated to form
longitudinally arranged, compact structures that have been referred to as striatal
chains, being reminiscent of the SVZ and RMS chains (Fig. 13.2d). However, intraventricular injections of a cell tracer (cell tracker green, CTG) failed to specifically
label these neuroblasts, and three-dimensional reconstruction analyses of the striatal chains revealed no connections with the SVZ (Luzzati et al. 2006). Thus, striatal
and SVZ chains are two separate populations.

13  Neurogenesis in the Adult Rabbit

327

These data suggest that rabbit striatal neurogenesis does originate from the
activity of local neuronal progenitors, rather than from SVZ extensions, an hypothesis that was confirmed by in  vitro approaches, such as the culture of caudate
nucleus tissue explants (Luzzati et  al. 2006). Consistent with these results, the
analysis of cycling cells in the rabbit striatum revealed the existence of proliferating
clusters associated to the striatal chains. The phenotypic analysis indicated that
most of these elements express the astroglial marker BLBP (brain lipid-binding
protein; Anthony et  al. 2004), a protein abundant in radial glial cells serving as
progenitors for the adult SVZ and SGZ neurogenesis. Moreover, nearly 60% of
proliferating elements of the same clusters also express the early neuronal marker
doublecortin, suggesting a clonal relationship between BLBP- and doublecortinexpressing cells (Fig. 13.2d). Thus, the mature parenchyma of the rabbit striatum
would contain glial cells acting as primary neuronal progenitors associated to transit
amplifying elements.
On the whole, these experiments indicate a striking ability of the rabbit striatum
in maintaining adult neurogenesis under physiological condition. Although in
rodents and in some primates only small numbers of neuroblasts/new neurons have
been described in the mature striatum under physiological conditions (Dayer et al.
2005; Bédard et al. 2002), neurogenesis in this region can be experimentally stimulated (Fallon et al. 2000; Arvidsson et al. 2002). Following these treatments, also
the striatum of rodents show neuroblasts organized both as individual cells or as
chains, followed by strong cell selection and poor integration of new neurons
(Arvidsson et al. 2002).
These observations support the general vision of the mature mammalian striatum as an unfavorable environment for the survival rather than the genesis of newly
formed neuroblasts. In most cases, whether the occurrence of local multipotent
progenitors into the mature brain parenchyma can be caused by either translocation
of embryonic pools of progenitor cells or migration of transit-amplifying elements
from the persistent neurogenic zones remains to be determined. Accordingly, the
origin, identity, and multipotentiality of local parenchymal progenitors of the rabbit
CNS remain as yet unresolved, but the rabbit could be a suitable model to address
these issues.

13.3.2 Neurogenesis in the Postnatal and Adult Cerebellum
13.3.2.1 Cerebellar Neurogenesis in Mammals
Striking neurogenesis has been described to occur throughout life in the cerebellum
of some nonmammalian vertebrates, such as fish (Zupanc 2006). By contrast, the
mammalian cerebellum is known as one of the most static structures in the CNS,
its plasticity being limited to synaptic rearrangement of preexisting circuits (Ito
2006). In contrast to the forebrain, the cerebellum is considered incapable of any
spontaneous cell genesis after the exhaustion of the external germinal layer (EGL).

328

G. Ponti et al.

The EGL is a secondary actively proliferating zone made up of cell precursors that
originate from the germinal trigone following tangential subpial displacement, then
leading to protracted genesis of the granule cell population in the postnatal developing cerebellar cortex (Altman and Bayer 1997). In all species studied, this transitory
germinal zone progressively reduces its thickness as the granule cell precursors
migrate deep into the cortex to form the inner granule layer (Fig. 13.3a,b). In altricial mammals, which are not able to walk and run soon after birth, the EGL is active
in the pre- and postnatal period (Sanchez-Villagra and Sultan 2001). Later, it disappears at specific ages (reviewed in Bonfanti and Ponti 2008; Fig. 13.3a). In parallel,
the genesis of cerebellar interneurons originating from the neuroepithelium and
migrating through the white matter is completed before the end of granule cell
genesis (see Leto et  al. 2008). This population of interneuron precursors of neuroepithelial origin specifically expresses the transcription factor Pax2 (Maricich
and Herrup 1999; Weisheit et al. 2006), whereas Pax6 is expressed by EGL-derived
granule cell precursors (Engelkamp et al. 1999; Yamasaki et al. 2001).
After EGL exhaustion, the parallel fibers of the molecular layer come in direct
contact with the pial surface, with the interposition of the glia limitans (Bergmann
glial end feet; Altman and Bayer 1997; Fig. 13.3b¢). No sign of cell proliferation or
cells expressing early differentiation markers such as PSA-NCAM and doublecortin can be detected in the cerebellar cortex after this stage (P21 in mice; Bonfanti
et  al. 1992; Ponti et  al. 2006a). By contrast, recent work carried out in the New
Zealand white rabbit described the existence of a secondary germinal matrix
­persisting beyond puberty in the subpial position (Ponti et al. 2006a). This germinal
matrix has been called the subpial layer (SPL; Ponti et  al. 2006a) because it
­undergoes postnatal structural modifications similar to those described in the
­forebrain SVZ.

13.3.2.2 The Subpial Layer
Cell proliferation is detectable on the rabbit cerebellar surface up to the fifth month
of age, thus extending beyond puberty (Ponti et al. 2006a). Analyses of the rabbit
SPL at different postnatal/peripuberal stages by combination of different techniques (i.e., detection of Ki67 and BrdU at 2-h survival, electron microscopy,
and detection of BrdU at different survival times in association with antigens of
cell specification/differentiation) reveal that proliferating elements are in subpial
position forming a single, noncontinuous layer not affecting the meninges
(Figs. 13.2 and 13.3).
The SPL contains tangential chains of neuroblasts that express molecules
strictly associated to adult newly generated neuronal precursors and required for
their migration, such as PSA-NCAM and doublecortin (reviewed in Bonfanti 2006;
see Fig.  13.2e–g). The real nature of the chains of these cell aggregates was
confirmed by electron microscopy serial reconstruction of cerebellar coronal
and parasagittal sections (Ponti et al. 2006a). Small subpial cells (about 3–4 mm in
diameter) sharing the same cytology of neuroblasts (type A cells) in the SVZ of

13  Neurogenesis in the Adult Rabbit

329

Fig.  13.3  Rabbit cerebellar neurogenesis. Cerebellar neurogenesis in mammals is thought to
cease at specific early postnatal (prepuberal) ages (a); this coincides with the exhaustion of the
external germinal layer (EGL, b), leaving a direct contact between the molecular layer and the pia
mater (PM) (B¢). BL basal lamina, g glia. In rabbits, around P40 the EGL is replaced by the SPL,
a proliferative layer characterized by chains of neuroblasts (B¢¢, B¢¢¢, c). (d) Dynamics of postnatal,
peripuberal, and adult neurogenesis in rabbits (see text)

330

G. Ponti et al.

both mice (Doetsch et al. 1997) and rabbits (Ponti et al. 2006b) are present at the
basal lamina/molecular layer interface (Fig.  13.3c). Thousands of these chains
cover the entire cerebellar perimeter, regularly arranged with a medial–lateral
orientation, and spaced about 10–20 mm from one another in 3-month-old animals.
Dividing cells and chains of neuroblasts in the SPL are part of the same population
of newly generated cells, as showed by subsequent pulses of BrdU (see Fig. 13.2f,g).
Both cell proliferation and chains in the SPL show homogeneous topographic
distribution throughout the cerebellar cortical extension, thus excluding that a
restricted site could be a source of the newly generated cells. This assumption is
confirmed by the absence of cell proliferation in the ependymal regions of the
fourth ventricle at any postnatal periods.
To clarify the dynamics of cerebellar postnatal neurogenesis in mammals, the
last phases of EGL exhaustion in the mouse cerebellum were reexamined (Ponti
et  al. 2006a). Although a fragmentation of the EGL premigratory layer in small
chain-like aggregates does occur just before EGL disappearance, in mice the occurrence of these structures is limited in time (4–5 days) and is followed by complete
disappearance after postnatal day 21 (P21), as previously described (Altman and
Bayer 1997). SPL chains could be involved in the tangential displacement of neuronal
precursors, as shown in the mouse EGL premigratory layer before engagement in
radial migration (Komuro et al. 2001).
The transition from rabbit EGL to SPL occurs at the end of the first month of
life, when the EGL becomes a monolayer. After P40, no distinction between proliferative and premigratory layers is detectable, and a clear pattern of chain
fragmentation is maintained up to 4–5 months of age, with a progressive increase
in the distance among chains and decrease in their number. From the second month
of age up to puberty (fourth month), the neurogenic process in the SPL is remarkable.
Then, dividing cells on the cerebellar surface disappear between the fifth and sixth
months. Thus, the SPL spans from 1 to 5 months of age, persisting shortly beyond
puberty (summarized in Fig. 13.3c).
The rabbit SPL shares features with the forebrain SVZ. It originates from structural modification of a secondary germinal layer, and it generates neuronal precursors that assemble into tangential chains sharing antigenic and ultrastructural
features with SVZ chains (Lois et al. 1996; Doetsch et al. 1997; Peretto et al. 1997;
reviewed in Bonfanti 2006), although smaller and far more numerous. On the other
hand, the transitory character of the rabbit SPL highly differs from persisting brain
neurogenic areas, suggesting that it contains a population of neuronal progenitors
rather than stem cells. This assumption is supported by the absence of astrocytic
cell bodies within the SPL, an essential element in the SVZ and hippocampal neural
stem cell niches (Doetsch et al. 1997; Seri et al. 2004).
13.3.2.3 Newly Formed Cells in the Cerebellar Cortex
Besides the protracted proliferative activity of the SPL, new cells continue to be
generated in the whole cerebellar cortex of peripuberal rabbits. A remnant of this
process is still detectable in the adult, in the absence of the SPL.

13  Neurogenesis in the Adult Rabbit

331

Peripuberal Rabbits
In spite of a progressive reduction in cell genesis within the SPL, and in sharp
contrast with our common knowledge concerning the mammalian cerebellum, a
remarkable genesis of cells is detectable in the peripuberal rabbit cerebellar cortex
(Figs.  13.2 and 13.3). Systematically administered BrdU detected at different
postinjection survival times (from 5 to 15 days) reveals that a substantial amount of
these cells is still alive 2 weeks after their birth (Ponti et al. 2006a) and, to a lesser
extent, after 2 months (Ponti et  al. 2008; Fig.  13.3d). Their morphology can be
visualized by double labelings with antibodies raised against markers of structural
plasticity implicated in dynamic cellular events of developmental and adult neurogenesis, such as PSA-NCAM, doublecortin, and the cytoskeletal protein Map5
(Brown et  al. 2003; Bonfanti 2006). The newly generated cortical cells fall into
three main morphological types: bipolar, polarized neuronal-like, and multipolar
(see Fig.  13.2l,m), homogeneously distributed in all dorsal/ventral and medial/
lateral lamellae. PSA-NCAM and doublecortin are detectable in bipolar and polarized
cells but not in multipolar cells. The latter are immunoreactive for the microtubuleassociated protein Map5 (Map1B; Wu et al. 2001; Fig. 13.2m).
The persistence of neurogenic processes in the SPL raises the question as to how
long is the genesis of granule cells in rabbits prolonged. A subpopulation of PSANCAM+/doublecortin+ bipolar cortical cells express the markers for cerebellar
granule cell precursors Pax6 (Yamasaki et al. 2001) and NeuN (Weyer and Schilling
2003). However, Pax6 and NeuN in the rabbit cerebellum disappear starting from
the third postnatal month (Ponti et  al. 2008; Fig.  13.3d), thus indicating that the
descent of granule cell precursors is exhausted before puberty, as in rodents.
The immunoreactivity for the microtubule-binding protein doublecortin (Brown
et  al. 2003) in virtually all PSA-NCAM+ cells confirms their neuronal nature.
Bipolar cells show the typical morphology of migrating elements. Polarized
­neuronal-like cells are restricted to the molecular layer. They have a piriform cell
body (15–20 mm long), a long, thin axonal-like process with a U-shaped direction
remaining within the molecular layer, and one to three thicker, dendritic-like
­processes on the opposite side of the cell (Fig.  13.2i,l). BrdU/PSA-NCAM
double staining carried out at 5, 10, and 15 days postinjection survival times
­support the existence of a neurogenic sequence leading to a young neuronal cell
type in the molecular layer during a 2-week temporal window. These neuronal cells
also express the transcription factor Pax2, a nuclear marker for GABAergic cerebellar
interneurons of neuroepithelial origin (Maricich and Herrup 1999; Weisheit et al.
2006). In addition, most of them show a remarkable staining for the neurotransmitter g-aminobutyric acid (GABA), also present in inhibitory interneurons. By
­considering the coexpression of all molecules, it can be concluded that a subset of
GABAergic interneurons of neuroepithelial origin are generated within the
­peripuberal rabbit cerebellar cortex (Ponti et al. 2008).
The Map5+ multipolar cells are characterized by a spheric cell body, about 8–10
mm in diameter, and a stellate, highly ramified morphology. Using BrdU/Map5
double staining, they also are shown to be newly generated (Ponti et  al. 2008;

332

G. Ponti et al.

Fig.  13.2m). In contrast with the neuronal cells described above, the multipolar
cells are more homogeneously distributed in all cerebellar layers and are not immunoreactive for PSA-NCAM, doublecortin, or glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP).
They are consistently double stained for both the transcription factors Sox2 and
Olig2 (Zhou and Anderson 2002; Takebayashi et al. 2002) but not for Pax2. Thus,
the PSA-NCAM+/doublecortin+ cells and the Map5+ cells actually represent two
distinct populations, at least under the antigenic expression profile.
Based on their morphology, multipolar cells could belong to the population
referred in rodents to as synantocytes (elements that form multiple contact with
neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes; Butt et al. 2005) or as polydendrocytes
(related to oligodendrocytes but with more processes and functions; Nishiyama
2007). Because the expression of Map5 remains at relatively high level in neurogenic/structurally plastic regions of the adult brain (Viereck et  al. 1989; Nothias
et al. 1996), in the cerebellum of lagomorphs anti-Map5 antibodies seem to act as
a marker for a reservoir of dividing or young progenitor cells related to the synantocyte/polydendrocyte lineage. However, because of the lack of antibodies capable
of localizing in the rabbit tissue the general marker for synantocytes/polydendrocytes in rodents (Ng2 antigen), we do not know if the rabbit Map5+ cells represent
a subpopulation of Ng2+ progenitors.
An analysis carried out in postnatal mice (Ponti et al. 2006a) confirmed that no
cell proliferation and no PSA-NCAM+ or doublecortin+ cells can be detected in the
whole cerebellar cortex after P21, thus supporting peripuberal cerebellar neurogenesis as specific to rabbits.

Adult Rabbits
Although in adults the cerebellar surface is completely devoid of SPL, newly generated cells are detectable in the cortex using cell proliferation markers. The occurrence of BrdU+ nuclei (after 15 days survival) associated with PSA-NCAM+/
doublecortin+ neuronal-shaped cells and Map5+ multipolar cells confirms that both
cell populations continue to be generated in fully adult animals up to 3 years of age
(Ponti et al. 2008). Similarly to what is observed in peripuberal stages, the neuronalshaped PSA-NCAM+/doublecortin+ cells coexpress the transcription factor Pax2
and are immunoreactive for GABA. Accordingly, the Map5+ stellate-shaped cells
coexpress Sox2 and Olig2. As expected, no Pax6+ cells could be detected in the
adult cerebellar cortex.
Some differences concern the absence of PSA-NCAM+/doublecortin+ cells
within the white matter of adult cerebella and the very rare occurrence of bipolarshaped cells in the cortex. Counting carried out on adult animals indicates that a
progressive reduction in the number of newly generated cerebellar progenitor cells
does occur (1/10 with respect to the 6-month old rabbit, and 1/100 with respect to
the 3-month-old). About one-half of these cells are neuronal progenitors in the
molecular layer.

13  Neurogenesis in the Adult Rabbit

333

13.4 Concluding Remarks
Persistent neurogenesis is a phylogenetically highly conserved feature in the animal
world (Lindsey and Tropepe 2006). The genesis of new neurons is rather widespread in the CNS of invertebrates and nonmammalian vertebrates such as fish,
reptiles, and birds (Garcia-Verdugo et al. 2002; Zupanc 2006), whereas in mammals
it is more restricted to specific brain areas (Gage 2000; Alvarez-Buylla and GarcìaVerdugo 2002; Bonfanti and Ponti 2008). Recent comparative studies have started
to show the existence of important differences even among mammals: these involve
the topographic location of neurogenesis, the internal arrangement of adult neurogenic sites, and the mode/direction of cell migration (reviewed in Bonfanti and
Ponti 2008; Gould 2007; see Part III of this book).
The use of rabbits as a model to address issues of comparative neurogenesis has
revealed intriguing examples of structural plasticity. Differences in the internal
arrangement of SVZ cellular compartments seem to be associated with the extension and shape of the ventricular cavities. A peculiar feature in rabbits concerns the
occurrence of chains of neuroblasts in regions of the mature brain parenchyma
other than the SVZ-RMS pathway. These regions include the corpus callosum, the
frontal cortex, and the amygdala (parenchymal chains), the caudate nucleus (striatal
chains), and the cerebellar surface (SPL chains). A common feature of all these
“extra-SVZ” chains is their relative glia independence. Parenchymal chains in the
forebrain and SPL chains in the cerebellum are temporally restricted to young,
growing animals, whereas those in the striatum persist throughout life. Forebrain
parenchymal chains are nonproliferative extensions of a neurogenic site, whereas
SPL chains are substantially independent from the protracted neurogenic activity
detectable within the cerebellar cortex. In this context, only the striatal chains are
part of a quantitatively low but complete neurogenic sequence.
The most peculiar feature of rabbits seems to be related to the occurrence of
local neural progenitors in the mature striatum and cerebellum, namely, in the
so-called nonneurogenic parenchyma of rodents. It is now well established that
cell proliferation in the adult mammalian CNS is not restricted to the germinative regions of hippocampus and olfactory bulb. Yet, in rodents it is generally
thought that cell proliferation in nonneurogenic regions gives rise primarily to
glial cells. Neuronal progenitors could naturally exist in several mature regions
including septum, striatum, cerebral cortex, and spinal cord, but their potentialities would be extrinsecated only in vitro, under experimental conditions (Palmer
et al. 1999; Kondo and Raff 2000). A still open question concerns the origin and
specification of stem cells and local parenchymal progenitors (Temple 2001;
Wexler and Palmer 2002). Future studies should be addressed to establish
whether adult local parenchymal progenitors represent displaced periventricular
embryonic progenitors and whether their specification can be regulated by external
factors. This knowledge is crucial in the perspective of designing new efficient
strategies for mobilizing endogenous progenitors to replace dying neurons in
CNS diseases.

334

G. Ponti et al.

The overall features emerging from the rabbit model indicate that in this
mammalian species the CNS is permissive to newly born cells at different levels,
including cell migration through the brain parenchyma from “classic” neurogenic
sites, along with the possibility of cell migration and differentiation from local cell
progenitors capable of dividing in situ, both in brain and in the cerebellum. In this
perspective, rabbits could offer the opportunity of studying in vivo mechanisms to
efficiently mobilizing endogenous progenitors in wide areas of the CNS.
A possible functional explanation for differences in neurogenic potential
between rodents and lagomorphs could reside in the pronounced variation in
lifespan among these animal species. Distinct patterns of growth, maturation, and
senescence may have an impact on the extent of plasticity and neurogenesis
throughout life (Lindsey and Tropepe 2006; Berardi et al. 2000). This theory opens
the intriguing possibility that a delayed genesis of neuronal and glial progenitor
cells could exist in other mammalian species characterized by slow growth and long
lifespan, including humans. In this context, the rabbit brain and cerebellum could
be a suitable model for studying CNS permissiveness in mammals.
Acknowledgments  This work was supported by Compagnia di San Paolo (Progetto
NEUROTRANSPLANT-2004.2019).

References
Altman J, Bayer SA (1997) Development of the cerebellar system. CRC Press, Boca Raton,
USA
Alvarez-Buylla A, Garcìa-Verdugo JM (2002) Neurogenesis in adult subventricular zone.
J Neurosci 22:629–634
Anthony TE, Klein C, Fishell G, Heintz N (2004) Radial glia serve as neuronal progenitors in all
regions of the central nervous system. Neuron 41:881–890
Arvidsson A, Collin T, Kirik D et al (2002) Neuronal replacement from endogenous precursors in
the adult brain after stroke. Nat Med 8:963–970
Bédard A, Cossette M, Lévesque M, Parent A (2002) Proliferating cells can differentiate into
neurons in the striatum of normal adult monkey. Neurosci Lett 328:213–216
Berardi N, Pizzorusso T, Maffei L (2000) Critical periods during sensory development. Curr Opin
Neurobiol 10:138–145
Bonfanti L (2006) PSA-NCAM in mammalian structural plasticity and neurogenesis. Prog
Neurobiol 80:129–164
Bonfanti L, Ponti G (2008) Adult neurogenesis and the New Zealand white rabbit. Vet
J 175:310–331
Bonfanti L, Olive S, Poulain DA, Theodosis, DT (1992) Mapping of the distribution of polysialylated neural cell adhesion molecule throughout the central nervous system of the adult rat: an
immunohistochemical study. Neuroscience 49:419–436
Brown JP, Couillard-Després S, Cooper-Kuhn CM et al (2003) Transient expression of doublecortin
during adult neurogenesis. J Comp Neurol 467:1–10
Butt AM, Hamilton N, Hubbard P, Pugh M, Ibrahim M (2005) Synantocytes: the fifth element.
J Anat 207:695–706
Chenn A, Walsh CA (2002) Regulation of cerebral cortical size by control of cell cycle exit in
neural precursors. Science 297:365–369

13  Neurogenesis in the Adult Rabbit

335

Curtis MA, Kam M, Nannmark U et al (2007) Human neuroblasts migrate to the olfactory bulb
via a lateral ventricular extension. Science 315:1243–1249
Dayer AG, Cleaver KM, Abouantoun T, Cameron HA (2005) New GABAergic interneurons in the
adult neocortex and striatum are generated from different precursors. J Cell Biol 168,
415–427
Doetsch F, Garcìa-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (1997) Cellular composition and threedimensional organization of the subventricular germinal zone in the adult mammalian brain.
J Neurosci 17:5046–5041
Douzery EJ, Huchon D (2004) Rabbits, if anything, are likely Glires. Mol Phylogenet Evol
33:922–935
Engelkamp D, Rashbass P, Seawright A, van Heyningen V (1999) Role of Pax6 in development
of the cerebellar system. Development 126:3585–3596
Fallon J, Reid S, Kinyamu R et  al (2000) In vivo induction of massive proliferation, directed
migration, and differentiation of neural cells in the adult mammalian brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 97:14686–14691
Gage FH (2000) Mammalian neural stem cells. Science 287:1433–1438
Garcia-Verdugo JM, Ferron S et al (2002) The proliferative ventricular zone in adult vertebrates:
a comparative study using reptiles, birds, and mammals. Brain Res Bull 57:765–775
Gould E (2007) How widespread is adult neurogenesis in mammals? Nat Rev Neurosci
8:481–488
Gould E, Reeves AJ, Graziano MS, Gross CG (1999) Neurogenesis in the neocortex of adult
primates. Science 286:548–552
Gould E, Vail N, Wagers M, Gross CG (2001) Adult-generated hippocampal and neocortical
neurons in macaques have a transient existence. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:10910–10917
Ito M (2006) Cerebellar circuitry as a neuronal machine. Prog Neurobiol 78:272–303
Komuro H, Yacubova E, Yacubova E, Rakic P (2001) Mode and tempo of tangential cell migration
in the cerebellar external granule layer. J Neurosci 21:527–540
Kondo T, Raff M (2000) Oligodendrocyte precursor cells reprogrammed to become multipotential
CNS stem cells. Science 289:1754–1757
Kornack DR, Rakic P (2001) The generation, migration, and differentiation of olfactory neurons
in the adult primate brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:4752–4757
Kriegstein A, Noctor S, Martinez-Cerdeno V (2006) Patterns of neural stem and progenitor cell
division may underlie evolutionary cortical expansion. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:883–890
Leonhardt H (1972) Topographic distribution of subependymal basement labyrinths of the ventricular system of brain in rabbit. Z Zellforsch Mikrosk Anat 127:392–406
Leto K, Bartolini A, Rossi F (2008) Neurogenesis in the cerebellum of rodents. In: Bonfanti L, ed.
Postnatal and Adult Neurogenesis. Research Signpost, Trivandrum, India pp. 63–81
Lindsey BW, Tropepe V (2006) A comparative framework for understanding the biological principles of adult neurogenesis. Prog Neurobiol 80:281–307
Lois C, Alvarez-Buylla A (1994) Long-distance neuronal migration in the adult mammalian brain.
Science 264:1145–1148
Lois C, Garcìa-Verdugo J, Alvarez-Buylla A (1996) Chain migration of neuronal precursors.
Science 271:978–981
Luzzati F, Peretto P, Aimar P et  al (2003) Glia-independent chains of neuroblasts through the
subcortical parenchyma of the adult rabbit brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100:13036–13041
Luzzati F, De Marchis S, Fasolo A, Peretto P (2006) Neurogenesis in the caudate nucleus of the
adult rabbit. J Neurosci 26:609–621
Luzzati F, De Marchis S, Fasolo A, Peretto P (2007) Adult neurogenesis and local neuronal
progenitors in the striatum. Neurodegen Dis 4:322–327
Maricich SM, Herrup K (1999) Pax-2 expression defines a subset of GABAergic interneurons and
their precursors in the developing murine cerebellum. J Neurobiol 41:281–294
McFarland WL, Morgane PJ, Jacobs MS (1969) Ventricular system of the brain of the dolphin,
Tursiops truncatus, with comparative anatomical observations and relations to brain specializations. J Comp Neurol 135:275–368

336

G. Ponti et al.

Nishiyama A (2007) Polydendrocytes: NG2 cells with many roles in development and repair of
the CNS. Neuroscientist 13:62–76
Nothias F, Fischer I, Murray M et al (1996) Expression of a phosphorylated isoform of MAP1B
is maintained in adult central nervous system areas that retain capacity for structural plasticity.
J Comp Neurol 368:317–334
Palmer TD, Markakis EA, Willhoite AR, Safar F, Gage, FH (1999) Fibroblast growth factor-2
activates a latent neurogenic program in neural stem cells from diverse regions of the adult
CNS. J Neurosci 19:8487–8497
Peretto P, Merighi A, Fasolo A, Bonfanti L (1997) Glial tubes in the rostral migratory stream of
the adult rat. Brain Res Bull 42:9–21
Peretto P, Giachino C, Aimar P et al (2005) Chain formation and glial tube assembly in the shift from
neonatal to adult subventricular zone of the rodent forebrain. J Comp Neurol 487:407–427
Ponti G, Peretto P, Bonfanti L (2006a) A subpial, transitory germinal zone forms chains of
neuronal precursors in the rabbit cerebellum. Dev Biol 294:168–180
Ponti G, Aimar P, Bonfanti L (2006b) Cellular composition and cytoarchitecture of the rabbit
subventricular zone (SVZ) and its extensions in the forebrain. J Comp Neurol 498:491–507
Ponti G, Peretto P, Bonfanti L (2008) Genesis of neuronal and glial progenitors in the cerebellar
cortex of peripuberal and adult rabbits. PLoS ONE 3:e2366
Quinones-Hinojosa A, Sanai N, Soriano-Navarro M et al (2006) Cellular composition and cytoarchitecture of the adult human subventricular zone: a niche of neural stem cells. J Comp
Neurol 494:415–434
Rodriguez-Perez LM, Perez-Martin M, Jimenez, AJ et al (2003) Immunocytochemical characterization of the wall of the bovine ventricle. Cell Tissue Res 314:325–335
Sanai N, Tramontin AD, Quinones-Hinojosa A et  al (2004) Unique astrocyte ribbon in adult
human brain contains neural stem cells but lacks chain migration. Nature 427:740–744
Sanchez-Villagra MR, Sultan F (2001) The cerebellum at birth in therian mammals, with special
reference to rodents. Brain Behav Evol 59:101–113
Seri B, Garcìa-Verdugo JM, Collaudo-Morente L et al (2004) Cell types, lineage, and architecture
of the germinal zone in the adult dentate gyrus. J Comp Neurol 478:359–378
Takebayashi H, Nabeshima Y, Yoshida, S et al (2002) The basic helix-loop-helix factor olig2 is
essential for the development of motoneuron and oligodendrocyte lineages. Curr Biol
12:1157–1163
Temple S (2001) The development of neural stem cells. Nature 414:112–117
Viereck C, Tucker RP, Matus A (1989) The adult rat olfactory system expresses microtubuleassociated proteins found in the developing brain. J Neurosci 9:3547–3557
Weisheit G, Gliem M, Endl E et al (2006) Postnatal development of the murine cerebellar cortex:
formation and early dispersal of basket, stellate and Golgi neurons. Eur J Neurosci 24:466–478
Wexler E, Palmer T (2002) Where, oh where, have my stem cells gone? Trends Neurosci
25:225–227
Weyer A, Schilling K (2003) Developmental and cell type-specific expression of the neuronal
marker NeuN in the murine cerebellum. J Neurosci Res 73:400–409
Wu HY, Dawson MR, Reynolds R, Hardy RJ (2001) Expression of QKI proteins and MAP1B identifies actively myelinating oligodendrocytes in adult rat brain. Mol Cell Neurosci 17:292–302
Yamasaki T, Kawaji K, Ono K et al (2001) Pax6 regulates granule cell polarization during parallel
fiber formation in the developing cerebellum. Development 128:3133–3144
Zhou Q, Anderson DJ (2002) The bHLH transcription factors OLIG2 and OLIG1 couple neuronal
and glial subtype specification. Cell 109:61–73
Zupanc GK (2006) Neurogenesis and neuronal regeneration in the adult fish brain. J Comp
Physiol A 192:649–670

Chapter 14

Neuronal Migration in the Adult Brain
Masato Sawada, Shi-hui Huang, Yuki Hirota, Naoko Kaneko,
and Kazunobu Sawamoto

Abstract  Neuronal migration is an important process in brain development and
homeostasis. It is not only a phenomenon of embryogenesis: it also occurs in the
adult brain, following adult neurogenesis. In fact, throughout life, numerous new
neurons generated in the adult subventricular zone take the long journey to the
olfactory bulb. The adult-born neurons form chain-like aggregates and migrate
inside glial tubes. In this chapter, we summarize current knowledge on the mechanisms of neuronal migration occurring in the adult brain of various animals under
physiological and pathological conditions.

14.1 Introduction
New neurons generated in the adult mouse subventricular zone (SVZ) migrate over
a long distance (about 8 mm) at a high speed (more than 100  mm/h), toward the
olfactory bulb (OB) (Luskin, 1993; Lois and Alvarez-Buylla, 1994; Alvarez-Buylla
and Garcia-Verdugo, 2002). After their arrival at the core of the OB, they migrate
radially to their final destination, and each differentiates into one of two major
types of interneurons in the granule and glomerular layers (Luskin, 1993). Studies
have established that neuronal migration from the SVZ to the OB is conserved from
rodents to primates (Kornack and Rakic, 2001; Pencea et  al., 2001). Moreover,
considerable evidence suggests that some newly generated neurons in the SVZ
migrate toward damaged areas and differentiate into mature local neurons in injured
brain tissue, indicating that the adult brain has the potential to regenerate damaged
neuronal circuitry (Arvidsson et al., 2002; Yamashita et al., 2006). In this chapter,

M. Sawada, S-H. Huang, Y. Hirota, N. Kaneko, and K. Sawamoto (*)
Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Institute of Molecular Medicine,
Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho,
Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan
e-mail: sawamoto@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp
T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_14, © Springer 2011

337

338

M. Sawada et al.

we describe the mechanisms of neuronal migration from the SVZ toward the OB in
the adult rodent brain. We also compare these mechanisms with neuronal migratory
mechanisms in the injured brain and in primates.

14.2 Neuronal Migration from the Subventricular Zone
to the Olfactory Bulb in the Adult Rodent Brain
14.2.1 Chain Migration and Cell–Cell Interactions
In rodents, new neurons generated in the adult SVZ migrate a long distance at a high
speed toward the OB (Fig.  14.1). The migrating new neurons (neuroblasts) form
elongated cell aggregates called “chains,” in which each cell migrates along the others
in the chain (Lois et  al., 1996). In contrast to the radial glia-dependent neuronal
migration in the developing cerebral cortex, the movement of neuroblasts in chains
in the adult SVZ does not require axons or glial fibers (Wichterle et al., 1997). The
neuroblasts migrate rostrally, forming an extensive network of chains covering
the lateral wall of the lateral ventricles. They then enter a restricted pathway called
the rostral migratory stream (RMS), which leads to the OB (Doetsch and AlvarezBuylla, 1996). In the RMS, the neuronal chains are surrounded by tubes composed
of astrocytic processes (Lois et al., 1996). The chains of neuroblasts and surrounding
glial tubes are distinct characteristics of the adult RMS. The studies described in the
following sections suggest that strictly regulated interactions between the neuroblasts and glia contribute to the fast and directional migration of the neuroblasts.

Fig. 14.1  Neuronal migration from the subventricular zone (SVZ) to the olfactory bulb (OB) in
the adult rodent brain. Newly generated neuroblasts (red) migrate rostrally, forming an extensive
network of chains that cover the lateral wall of the lateral ventricles and then enter the rostral
migratory stream (RMS), which leads to the OB

14  Neuronal Migration in the Adult Brain

339

14.2.1.1 Neuroblast Interactions
Chain formation is a unique characteristic of neuroblasts generated in the adult
SVZ. Neuroblasts bunch up together into chains and migrate along their neighbors
efficiently, rather than being tangled with each other, suggesting that neuroblast
interactions with other factors are important for chain formation. Several extracellular ligands and their transmembrane receptors have been implicated in regulating
the interactions between neuroblasts (Fig. 14.2). The binding of ApoER2 (apolipoprotein E receptor 2) and its major ligand Reelin is a well-known signal for precise
cell positioning in the developing cerebral cortex. In the adult mouse, ApoER2 and
its downstream adaptor protein Dab1 (disabled-1) are expressed in the RMS, where
they are involved in chain formation independent of Reelin (Andrade et al., 2007).

Fig. 14.2  Chain migration in the adult RMS and radial migration in the OB. The aggregation of
migrating neuroblasts (red) into chains, and the formation of the surrounding glial tube (blue), are
distinct features of neuronal migration in the RMS. Cell–cell interactions, including those between
neuroblasts and between neuroblasts and glia, contribute to the formation of these structures.
Chain-forming neuroblasts migrate in close association with blood vessels (orange) inside the
glial tube, where extracellular matrix (ECM) components (green) accumulate around the chains.
In addition, guidance cues from the SVZ and OB regulate the fast and directional migration of
neuroblasts toward the OB. After arriving at the core of the OB, the neuroblasts disperse and begin
to migrate radially as individual cells. Some extracellular proteins may act as signals for detachment from the chains, and their activities seem to be regulated by sensory input

340

M. Sawada et al.

Instead, the glycoprotein THBS-1 (thrombospondin-1) has been identified as a
novel ligand for ApoER2 in the adult RMS in the promotion of neuroblast chain
formation (Blake et al., 2008).
Receptor tyrosine kinases also contribute to chain formation (Conover et  al.,
2000; Anton et al., 2004). The tyrosine kinase ErbB4 is predominantly expressed
on the cell membrane of neuroblasts. Mice lacking ErbB4 show a disrupted RMS
and misrouted neuroblasts (Anton et al., 2004). NRG1 (neuregulin-1) and NRG2,
ligands of ErbB4, are expressed in the RMS and appear to be involved in controlling interactions between neuroblasts during chain migration.
In addition to these soluble ligands and their receptors, extracellular matrix
(ECM)-mediated signaling also appears to regulate chain formation. Several ECM
components, including Tenascin-C and laminins, accumulate around the chains of
neuroblasts inside the glial tubes. ECM components in the RMS are known to act
not only as anchors for soluble factors but also as signaling ligands for migrating
neuroblasts.
Integrins are the major receptors linking ECM components with intracellular
signaling molecules. Of the a,b-heterodimer integrin family, a6b1 integrin is
expressed on the cell surface of neuroblasts, whereas its ligand laminin is concentrated around the neuroblasts in the RMS. Blocking the function of the a6 or b1
subunit causes disruption of the RMS (Emsley and Hagg, 2003). Both b1 integrin
conditional knockout mice and laminin a2/a4-deficient mice show chain formation
defects in  vivo (Belvindrah et  al., 2007). Moreover, the binding of laminin to b1
integrin promotes the chain formation of neuroblasts in vitro, and an ectopic infusion
of laminin changes the direction of neuronal migration. Thus, the integrin–laminin
interaction may positively regulate the chain formation of neuroblasts in the RMS.
For neuroblast migration in the RMS, it might be necessary for neuroblasts not
only to bind ECM components but also to modulate their activities. Integrin–ECM
component interactions are likely to be modulated by cell-surface proteases on the
neuroblasts. For example, in the early postnatal stage, ECM modulatory factors,
including ADAM2 (a disintegrin and metalloprotease-2), might be involved in
chain formation (Murase et al., 2008). Thus, the extracellular environment around
the chains may have multiple roles in the chain formation of neuroblasts.
Once the chains form, the neuroblasts must then migrate within the complex
environment inside the glial tubes. To migrate efficiently in the chains, neuroblasts
need to slide over each other smoothly. PSA-NCAM (polysialylated form of the
neural cell adhesion molecule), which is expressed on the cell membrane of neuroblasts, may be involved in this process. Neither the genetic deletion of the NCAM
gene (Cremer et  al., 1994) nor the elimination of the PSA moiety by enzymatic
digestion (Ono et  al., 1994) interferes with chain formation, but both manipulations cause neuroblasts to accumulate in the RMS and result in a smaller OB, suggesting that the PSA moiety is important for smooth cell migration, rather than for
chain formation itself (Chazal et  al., 2000). It is possible that the negatively
charged PSA moiety decreases the affinity between the NCAMs on neighboring
neuroblasts, thereby increasing the mobility of cells migrating in the chains
(Gascon et al., 2010).

14  Neuronal Migration in the Adult Brain

341

Extracellular stimuli mediated by soluble ligands and ECM components regulate
cytoskeletal rearrangements, which are likely to be involved in the control of cell
movement during chain migration (see Sect.  3). In the embryonic brain, cdk5
(cyclin-dependent kinase 5) plays an essential role in neuronal migration by regulating the cytoskeleton. We found that a conditional knockout of cdk5 causes
defects in neuroblast chain formation, migration speed, and direction in the postnatal RMS (Hirota et al., 2007). Thus, chain formation and migration seem to depend
on coordinated neuroblast interactions mediated by a variety of extracellular signals, some of which regulate the cytoskeleton.
14.2.1.2 Neuroblast–Glia Interactions
The glial tube structure is a separate and distinct feature of the adult RMS. SVZ
astrocytes, some of which act as neural stem cells (see Chap. 12 of this book), form
tunnels surrounding the chains of neuroblasts in the RMS (Fig. 14.2). These astrocytes appear to separate the migrating chain-forming neuroblasts physically from
the brain parenchyma.
In spite of its unique structure, the exact role of the glial tube is largely unknown.
Mice with chain migration defects also show altered glial tube organization (Chazal
et al., 2000; Anton et al., 2004; Belvindrah et al., 2007), suggesting that interactions
between the neuroblasts and the tube-forming astrocytes may be required for both
chain migration and glial tube formation. On the other hand, morphological studies
of nonrodent mammals such as the rabbit (see Chap. 13 of this book) have suggested
that the glial tubes are not essential for neuroblast migration in the adult brain.
The glial tube seems to provide a special microenvironment that enables neuroblasts to migrate efficiently. Migrating neuroblasts in the RMS release GABA
(g-aminobutyric acid), which activates the GABAAR (GABAA receptor) in a paracrine manner and negatively regulates neuroblast migration speed. RMS astrocytes
express GAT4, a high-affinity GABA transporter, which takes up excess GABA and
contributes to the tight regulation of neuronal migration (Bolteus and Bordey, 2004).
RMS astrocytes also release a novel attractive activity (migration-inducing activity,
MIA) for neuroblasts, although its identity remains unknown (Mason et al., 2001).
In addition to interactions between neuroblasts and glia, interactions among
neuroblasts, glia, and vascular endothelial cells in the adult RMS were recently
observed. The neuroblasts in chains are closely associated with blood vessels that
parallel the RMS (Fig. 14.2). The processes of the RMS astrocytes, which ensheath
blood vessels as well as the neuroblasts, capture BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic
factor) produced by the vascular endothelial cells and induce the blood vesselassociated migration in the adult RMS (Snapyan et al., 2009).
The defective cell migration phenotypes reported in various mutants with
impaired chain formation and/or glial tubes suggest that neuroblast–neuroblast and
neuroblast–glia interactions contribute to neuronal migration in the adult brain. The
continued identification of molecules that regulate the formation of chains and glial
tubes will help elucidate the complex mechanisms underlying cell migration in the
adult rodent brain.

342

M. Sawada et al.

14.2.2 Directional Control by Attractive and Repulsive Signaling
For neuroblasts generated in the SVZ, the journey to the OB is a long one. Even
though the migratory chains provide a directional structure, the chains must follow
the correct route. There is increasing evidence that the highly directional migration
of neuroblasts toward the OB is controlled by a combination of attractive and repulsive signaling molecules (see Fig. 14.2).
In the SVZ, Slit proteins appear to act as repulsive factors for neuroblasts.
During neural development, Slits are reported to bind their receptors, the Robos
(roundabouts), to regulate the cytoskeleton to control axonal guidance (Brose et al.,
1999; Li et al., 1999). In the adult brain, Slits secreted from the septum and choroid
plexus (Hu and Rutishauser, 1996; Hu, 1999; Wu et al., 1999), located at the caudal
region of the lateral ventricles, have been implicated in the regulation of neuronal
migration. Neuroblasts generated in the SVZ express Robos and can be repelled by
Slits (Hu, 1999; Wu et al., 1999). However, how the Slit proteins from the caudal
lateral ventricles might reach neuroblasts migrating in the SVZ tissue is unclear.
We found that the migration of neuroblasts parallels the direction of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow and the beating of ependymal cilia. Slit protein injected into
the ventricle forms a concentration gradient in the SVZ in the direction of ciliary
beating and CSF flow (Sawamoto et al., 2006). These results suggest that the concentration gradient of Slit protein formed by the CSF flow is involved in the directional control of neuronal migration. Interestingly, the neuroblasts express Slit1 as
well as its receptors Robo2/3 in the RMS, indicating that Slit1 may act cell-autonomously in the RMS (Nguyen-Ba-Charvet et al., 2004). Recently, we reported that
neuroblasts use Slit1 to interact with Robo-expressing astrocytes in their path for
rapid migration (Kaneko et al., 2010).
A gradient of CSF-derived repulsive molecules such as Slit could explain the neuroblast migration in the SVZ along the ventricular wall. However, it is unlikely to be
effective for neuroblasts migrating in the RMS toward the OB. One possible mechanism for guiding neuroblasts to their destinations is a chemotactic attraction to the OB.
One study showing that neuroblasts can still migrate rostrally after the OB is eliminated
by surgical aspiration seemed to indicate that attractive factors in the OB are not essential (Kirschenbaum et al., 1999). However, subsequent quantitative analyses indicated
that removing the OB significantly reduces the number of neuroblasts migrating toward
it (Liu and Rao, 2003). In addition, the role of the OB in the directional migration of
neuroblasts is supported by co-culture experiments showing that the OB glomerular
layer contains at least one chemoattractant for neuroblasts (Liu and Rao, 2003).
In fact, more recently, diffusible proteins expressed in the adult OB have been
reported to act as attractants for neuroblasts. A secreted ligand, PK2 (prokineticin
2), is expressed in the granule and glomerular layers in the OB (Ng et al., 2005),
whereas its receptor Prokr2 is expressed in neuroblasts in the RMS (Puverel et al.,
2009). PK2 shows an attractive activity for neuroblasts in vitro. In addition, in PK2
knockout mice and Prokr2 mutant mice neuroblasts accumulate in the rostral RMS,
resulting in a smaller than normal OB. Other putative attractants in the adult OB that

14  Neuronal Migration in the Adult Brain

343

have receptors expressed by neuroblasts include HGF (hepatocyte growth factor)/
Met, BDNF/TrkB, and GDNF (glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor)/GFRa1
(Paratcha et  al., 2006; Chiaramello et  al., 2007; Garzotto et  al., 2008). Netrin-1/
DCC signaling is also involved in the attraction of neuroblasts toward the OB.
However, netrin-1 expression is reduced by postnatal day 4 (Murase and Horwitz,
2002), suggesting that it might be involved in neuronal migration only in the early
postnatal stage. Taken together, the long journey of migrating neuroblasts toward
the core of the OB seems to be guided by a combination of mechanisms mediated
by repulsive factors from the SVZ and attractive factors from the OB.

14.2.3 Radial Migration in the Olfactory Bulb
Once neuroblasts arrive at the core of the OB, their chain migration halts. They
migrate radially as individual cells and differentiate into interneurons in the granule
and glomerular layers. This process, the transition from chain (tangential) to radial
migration, is required for the final differentiation of the new neurons (see Fig. 14.2),
and several molecules involved in this step have been reported.
In the adult OB, the extracellular protein Reelin is predominantly expressed by
mitral cells, whereas its receptor, ApoER2, and downstream adaptor protein, Dab1,
are expressed in neuroblasts migrating in the RMS (Hack et  al., 2002). In vitro,
Reelin induces the dispersion of neuroblast chains, without affecting the distance
or direction of neuroblast migration. In the Reelin mutant mouse reeler, the neuroblasts form thick cell aggregates in the rostral RMS, and moreover the neuroblasts
remain in their chains even in the granule layer of the OB. Individual radially
migrating cells are rarely seen in this mutant, suggesting that Reelin acts as a
detachment signal for the chain-forming neuroblasts.
Another ECM glycoprotein, Tenascin-R, also disperses the chain-forming neuroblasts and initiates their radial migration (Saghatelyan et al., 2004). In the adult
OB, Tenascin-R expression is restricted to the granule layer, and it is absent from
the SVZ and the RMS. Tenascin-R-deficient mice show accumulated neuroblasts in
the core of the OB that remain in chains in the granule layer, indicating Tenascin-R
is crucial for initiating radial migration.
Importantly, the Tenascin-R expression level is regulated by sensory input
(Saghatelyan et  al., 2004). Unilateral sensory deprivation by closing the naris
results in a subtle but significant decrease in Tenascin-R mRNA and protein, and
this decreased expression can be completely rescued by reopening the naris. Reelin
immunoreactivity is also reduced after the main olfactory epithelium is lesioned by
zinc sulfate treatment, which induces sensory deprivation (Okuyama-Yamamoto
et al., 2005). Thus, detachment signals and radial migration in the OB seem to be
regulated in a sensory activity-dependent manner. PK2/Prokr2, an attractant activity
for neuroblasts in the RMS, also functions as a detachment signal in the OB
(Ng et al., 2005); however, it remains unclear whether PK2 expression is regulated
by sensory input.

344

M. Sawada et al.

Because the adult OB contains highly packed neuronal circuitry, once the
neuroblasts disperse from the RMS, they probably need to alter their microenvironment to permit radial migration by remodeling surrounding components such
as the ECM. A recent study suggests that MMPs (matrix metalloproteases) are
involved in the radial migration in the OB. MMP inhibitors significantly reduce the
speed of radially migrating neuroblasts in slice culture time-lapse imaging (Bovetti
et al., 2007a).
In the RMS, neuroblasts migrate by sliding along each other, using their
neighbors as a scaffold. During their radial migration, the neuroblasts move as
individual cells without forming chains. One possible candidate for the scaffold
used by individual neuroblasts after their dispersion from the chains is blood
vessels. Radially migrating neuroblasts in the granule layer, but not in the glomerular layer, are associated with blood vessels, suggesting that blood vesselassociated migration might be an initial mechanism after detachment from the
chains (Bovetti et  al., 2007b). Another candidate scaffold, particularly for the
periglomerular cells, which migrate further into the region close to the OB surface, is the dendrites of mitral/tufted cells, although no such role has yet been
reported for them. Because the interneuron subtype that each neuroblast will
adopt in the OB is determined when it is generated in the SVZ (Merkle et  al.,
2007), neuroblasts with different fates may use distinct modes of radial migration in the OB. Thus, the mechanisms of radial migration in the OB remain
largely obscure.

14.3 Cytoskeletal Regulation
In contrast to migratory morphology of other cell types such as fibroblasts and
keratinocytes, typical neuroblasts in the adult RMS have a bipolar shape with a
relatively long leading process and shorter trailing process. Migrating neuroblasts
move in a saltatory manner by repeating three steps: (1) extension of the leading
process, (2) movement of the centrosome, and (3) nuclear movement and retraction
of the rear of the cell (Wichterle et  al., 1997; Schaar and McConnell, 2005;
Higginbotham et al., 2006). In the first step, the neuroblast initiates movement by
extending its leading process, which points to its destination along the neighboring
cells. This stage is followed by movement of the centrosome and then of the
nucleus (often called nuclear–centrosome (N–C) coupling). Similar cell behavior
has been reported in the migration of various types of cells in the developing brain,
although some neurons, such as cerebellar granule cells, show irregular movement
of the centrosome (Umeshima et  al., 2007). Cytoskeletal components such as
F-actin or microtubules and their regulatory proteins seem to be important for the
dynamic cytoskeletal reorganization at each step of neuroblast migration. Here we
summarize the molecular basis of the three steps in neuroblast migration in the
adult brain (Fig. 14.3).

14  Neuronal Migration in the Adult Brain

345

Fig. 14.3  Cytoskeletal regulation of chain-forming neuroblasts. The neuroblasts in chains have a
relatively long leading process and short trailing process. The nucleus of a migrating neuroblast
is linked with the centrosome by the perinuclear cage (PNC); this process is called N–C coupling
(a). When a neuroblast starts to migrate, it extends its leading process toward the direction of
movement along its neighbors. The receptors for directional cues as well as cytoskeletal regulators
are involved in this process (b). Next, the cell widens, expanding the cytosol anterior to the
nucleus, and the centrosome moves forward into it. Centrosomal positioning is predominantly
regulated by several cell polarity-related factors (c). The subsequent movement of the nucleus can
be mediated by both actomyosin-derived force and PNC-related factors (d). The chain-forming
neuroblasts in the RMS migrate in a saltatory manner by repeating these three steps (b–d)

14.3.1 Extension of the Leading Process
When neuroblasts start to migrate, they first form a long leading process in the
direction of movement, which is one of the distinct features of neuronal migration.
The direction and length of the leading process appear to depend on interactions of
cell-surface receptors with extracellular stimuli, including ECM components and
various growth factors. Of these guidance molecules, attractive cues usually activate the Rho family small GTPases Rac and cdc42, leading to membrane extension, whereas repellent cues induce retraction of the rear of the cell via the
activation of Rho and suppression of Rac and/or cdc42 (Guan and Rao, 2003).

346

M. Sawada et al.

Current evidence suggests that the extension of the neuronal leading process has
molecular mechanisms in common with axon pathfinding.
Close examination of migrating neuroblasts from mutant mice with defective
chain formation shows that they often do not form a normal leading process. For
example, neuroblasts in cdk5 conditional knockout or ErbB4 mutant mice exhibit,
respectively, a shorter than normal leading process or a misoriented leading process:
both phenotypes lead to irregularly directed migration (Anton et al., 2004; Hirota
et al., 2007). Because NRGs expressed in the RMS are chemoattractants for neuroblasts and cdk5 is activated by NRGs through ErbB receptors, it is possible that
ErbB4 is involved in the response to NRGs and the extension of the leading process.
In addition, a repulsive signal generated by the Slit–Robo interaction recruits
srGAP (Slit-Robo GTPase-activating protein) and leads to cdc42 inactivation,
possibly inducing reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton to cause shortening or
turning of the leading process (Wong et al., 2001). Thus, these extracellular stimuli
could converge into modification of cytoskeletal regulators such as cdk5 and cdc42
and in turn alter the cytoskeletal reorganization for leading process extension.

14.3.2 Movement of the Centrosome
After neuroblasts form new adhesions at the leading process, the cell widens,
expanding the cytosolic region anterior to the nucleus. Then, the centrosome, a
cytosolic organelle that includes two centrioles and integrates the peripheral and
perinuclear microtubule networks, moves forward into the expanded region. Several
reports have shown that the positioning of the centrosome is regulated by highly
conserved cell polarity-related factors, such as a complex containing Par3/6 (partitiondefective 3/6), aPKC (atypical protein kinase C), and microtubules (EtienneManneville and Hall, 2003; Solecki et al., 2004).
The cell polarity-related factors PKCz and GSK3b (glycogen synthase kinase3b) play key roles in centrosome reorientation in the migration of various neuronal
cells, including SVZ neuroblasts (Higginbotham et al., 2006). Specific inhibitors of
PKCz and GSK3b disrupt the centrosomal reorientation. Moreover, a GSK3b
inhibitor causes impaired extension of the leading process in response to Slit activity,
suggesting that the mechanisms for extension of the leading process are integrated
with those for centrosome movement.

14.3.3 Nuclear Movement and Retraction of the Rear of the Cell
Microtubules extending from the centrosome form a perinuclear cage (PNC)
around the nucleus. The PNC may contribute to N–C coupling, which appears to
be important for nuclear movement. Two models have been proposed for nuclear
movement. One involves microtubule–dynein interaction-mediated nuclear movement,

14  Neuronal Migration in the Adult Brain

347

in which dyneins on the PNC move toward the centrosome along bundles of
microtubules in an ATP-dependent manner, which generates force for the nuclear
movement (Tsai and Gleeson, 2005). The second involves F-actin-myosin
(actomyosin)-mediated nuclear movement. In this case, activation of the Rho family
small GTPase Rho leads to the phosphorylation of myosin II in the rear of the cell,
and then an actomyosin interaction-derived force pushes the nucleus toward the
centrosome in the expanded cytosolic region (Bellion et al., 2005).
In the SVZ neuroblasts, the major driving force for nuclear movement appears
to be actomyosin-mediated signals (Schaar and McConnell, 2005). Nocodazole, a
microtubule-depolymerizing agent, does not completely disrupt the nuclear movement or the retraction of the rear of the cell, whereas the myosin II-specific inhibitor
Blebbistatin rapidly inhibits them, indicating that myosin II activation at the rear of
the cell has a prominent role in retraction. Dcx (doublecortin), expressed in migrating
neuroblasts, is also involved in this process. It is reported that Dcx is localized to the
PNC with dynein and contributes to N–C coupling (Tanaka et al., 2004). Dcx mutant
mice show a nuclear movement defect with no effect on centrosome positioning
(Koizumi et al., 2006). These studies suggest that the microtubule-dynein and actomyosin systems might not be completely independent; instead, they probably share
common mechanisms or molecular partners in this process.
The precise molecular mechanisms regulating SVZ neuroblast migration are still
poorly understood. However, recent studies suggest that the SVZ neuroblasts share
some mechanisms of migration with other cell types. Because neuroblasts migrating
in chains use their neighbors as a scaffold, it is possible that homotypic cell adhesionmediated signals play a critical role in their cytoskeletal regulation. Further studies
are still needed to unravel the adult-specific cytoskeletal regulations of neuronal
migration in the adult brain.

14.4 Neuronal Migration in Primates
Most of the studies on adult neuronal migration have been performed in rodents.
However, similarities in the cytoarchitecture of the SVZ and RMS, such as the
chain formation of neuroblasts and glial tubes, are observed in nonrodent mammals,
including primates. The significance of these structures and why they are conserved
are important issues that are still not entirely clear.
Macaque monkeys (Macaca mulatta and Macaca fascicularis), nonhuman Old
World primates, are reported to possess an RMS structure similar to that of rodents
(Kornack and Rakic, 2001; Pencea et  al., 2001; Gil-Perotin et  al., 2009). As in
rodents, the macaque SVZ contains newly generated neuroblasts that display a
bipolar shape, a typical morphology for active migration, and that express the
immature neuronal markers PSA-NCAM and Tuj1 (neuron-specific class III
b-tubulin). These neuroblasts aggregate and form chains ensheathed by GFAP (glial
fibrillary acidic protein)-positive astrocytic processes in the core of the olfactory
tract, indicating the existence of a typical RMS structure. In Macaca fascicularis,

348

M. Sawada et al.

the chains of neuroblasts are not continuous in the RMS; rather, they seem to disperse into smaller clusters of three cells or fewer as they approach the OB (GilPerotin et al., 2009). Newly generated neuroblasts labeled with bromodeoxyuridine
(BrdU) reach the OB by 97 days, and some of these cells express NeuN, a mature
neuronal marker (Kornack and Rakic, 2001). These features of neuronal migration
persist from an early postnatal stage (P2) to adulthood (8  years) (Pencea et  al.,
2001). Thus, new OB interneurons generated in the SVZ migrate in chains through
the RMS to the OB in adult macaques.
The adult human SVZ also appears to contain neural stem cells that generate new
neurons, but the mechanisms of their migration remain controversial. In contrast to
macaque monkeys, PSA-NCAM- or Tuj1-positive neuroblasts were only rarely
observed in two studies on the adult human SVZ–olfactory trigone connection, which
is enriched in astrocytic processes and corresponds to the RMS, and they did not
appear to form chains (Sanai et  al., 2004; Quinones-Hinojosa et  al., 2006). On the
other hand, another group reported that this region contains migratory neuroblasts and
has a typical RMS structure, similar to that of rodents and macaques (Curtis et al.,
2007; Kam et al., 2009). Thus, neural stem cells reside in the SVZ, and their progeny
may migrate in chains or as individual cells toward the OB in the adult human.
Interestingly, in the adult common marmoset (a New World primate), in which the
SVZ has an organization similar to that of human rather than macaque monkeys, neuroblasts do not exhibit typical chain migration in the RMS (Sawamoto et al., 2011).
The finding of a rodent-like RMS in nonhuman primates indicates that it is an
important structure in many animal species. The difference in RMS structure
between humans and nonhumans might reflect a species difference in the dependency on olfaction. Indeed, most rodents and nonhuman primates depend strongly
on olfaction, and the size of their OB relative to their brain is greater than in
humans. Humans depend much more on the visual system and therefore may not
need to use chain migration. Nevertheless, at least in many nonhuman species,
chain migration appears to have been evolutionally conserved as a mechanism for
efficiently transporting a large number of neurons into the OB of the adult brain.

14.5 Neuronal Migration Toward Injured Brain Tissue
There are many reports that adult neurogenesis in the SVZ is affected by various
brain injuries, including damage caused by ischemia and neurodegenerative
diseases. Among many brain injury models, an ischemic stroke model induced by
middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) is widely used for studying the ectopic
neurogenesis that occurs after injury. MCAO causes infarction in the striatum and
adjacent parietal cortex (Fig. 14.4). After MCAO, neuronal precursors in the SVZ
proliferate, and a significant number of neuroblasts then appear in the vicinity of
the damaged area in the striatum; some differentiate into mature neurons (Arvidsson
et al., 2002; Parent et al., 2002). To determine the origin of these neuroblasts, we
used viral infection-mediated cell-lineage tracing methods, which showed that the
neuroblasts were derived from GFAP-positive astrocytes in the SVZ that migrated
toward the damaged striatum (Yamashita et al., 2006).

14  Neuronal Migration in the Adult Brain

349

Fig. 14.4  Neuronal migration toward injured brain tissue. The ischemic stroke model induced by
middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) causes infarction in the striatum and adjacent parietal
cortex (brown) (a). (b) After ischemic damage, inflammatory cells such as reactive astrocytes
(blue) and microglia (green) accumulate in the vicinity of the damaged area and may release
inflammatory cytokines. Angiogenic factors are also upregulated in the vicinity of the damaged
area and subsequently induce angiogenesis. Subsequently, some of the newly generated neuroblasts (red) in the SVZ change direction and migrate toward the infarct area. They frequently form
chains and are closely associated with blood vessels (orange) and astrocytic processes, similar to
neuroblast migration in the RMS. Angiogenic factors released from vascular endothelial cells as
well as inflammatory cytokines from reactive astrocytes and microglia may recruit neuroblasts to
the area of infarction

This finding leads to questions about how neuroblasts migrate to the damaged
area, and whether the mechanisms of neuronal migration differ in physiological
versus pathological conditions. In fact, in rodents, some of the morphological features of neuroblasts migrating in the RMS are also seen in those migrating toward
a damaged area (see Fig. 14.4). At first, they frequently form chain-like cell aggregates
(Parent et al., 2002; Yamashita et al., 2006; Thored et al., 2007). These chains are

350

M. Sawada et al.

largely oriented in the mediolateral direction toward the damaged striatum. In addition,
most of the chain-forming neuroblasts are closely associated with blood vessels or
astrocytic processes (Yamashita et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2009; Kojima et al., 2010).
Although the interaction between blood vessels and neuroblasts migrating in the
RMS appears to be mediated by BDNF signaling (Snapyan et  al., 2009), the
molecular mechanisms regulating the blood vessel-guided migration of neuroblasts
toward the damaged striatum have not yet been reported. As ischemic insult causes
various changes in the microenvironment of migrating neuroblasts, including
inflammation, reactive gliosis, and angiogenesis, it is likely that some distinct
mechanisms induce the migration of neuroblasts in response to damage.
In the ischemic striatum, angiogenesis is induced by the expression of several
angiogenic factors, including VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor), FGF-2
(fibroblast growth factor-2), and EGF (epidermal growth factor) (Hayashi et  al.,
2003), and angiogenesis precedes neurogenesis. The newly generated blood vessels
may act as the scaffold for neuroblast migration from the SVZ toward the damaged
striatum. Moreover, vascular endothelial cells release soluble factors that stimulate
neurogenesis in the SVZ (Shen et al., 2004), and these same factors might stimulate
neurogenesis after ischemia.
In addition to the angiogenic and neurogenic roles of the angiogenic factors,
some angiogenic and inflammatory factors probably act as chemoattractants for
migrating neuroblasts. SDF-1 (stromal cell-derived factor-1) and Ang-1 (angiopoietin-1)
are abundantly produced by vascular endothelial cells after stroke, and the neuroblasts migrating toward the damaged striatum express their respective receptors,
CXCR-4 and Tie-2. These signals could promote the migration of the neuroblasts
into the peri-infarct area or regulate their interaction with blood vessels (Imitola
et al., 2004; Ohab et al., 2006; Thored et al., 2006; Kojima et al., 2010). MCP-1
(monocyte chemoattractant protein-1), an inflammation-related factor produced by
activated microglia and reactive astrocytes, is also upregulated in the damaged area,
and acts as a chemoattractant for neuroblasts that express its receptor, CCR-2 (Yan
et al., 2007). Therefore, these angiogenic and inflammation-related factors induced
by ischemia could guide neuroblasts toward the damaged area.
In contrast to the neuroblasts in the RMS, which is a permissive environment for
migration in the adult brain, those in the damaged striatum need to move through
developed neuronal circuitry to reach the damaged area. To migrate through the
striatum to the damaged area after MCAO, neuroblasts utilize MMPs (Lee et al.,
2006), most likely because they must remodel the ECM to enable their movement
toward the damaged area.
Thus, neuroblasts migrating toward the damaged area form “chains” that are
closely associated with blood vessels, similar to those in the RMS under physiological conditions. In addition, recent studies have revealed several unique
mechanisms for neuroblast migration in the damaged brain. Further studies of
the regeneration process in the adult damaged brain may reveal new insights
into the interactions between migrating neuroblasts and their microenvironments and clarify the mechanisms underlying all types of neuronal migration in
the adult brain.

14  Neuronal Migration in the Adult Brain

351

14.6 Conclusion
In contrast to the embryonic brain, the adult brain contains highly packed neuronal
circuitry and numerous glia, an environment that is traditionally viewed as nonpermissive for neuronal migration. However, neuroblasts generated in the SVZ migrate
a long distance toward the OB at great speed, about four times faster than the radial
glia-dependent neuronal migration that occurs in the developing cerebral cortex.
Two major distinguishing features of neuronal migration in the RMS, neuroblast
chain formation and glial tubes, may be important for this efficient migration in the
adult brain. Furthermore, these features are conserved at least from rodents to nonhuman primates, although their existence in humans remains controversial. This
mode of neuronal migration also seems to be used in the adult injured brain as a
mechanism for supplying new neurons to the damaged area, at least in rodents.
At the single-cell level, the regulatory mechanisms of cytoskeletal reorganization seem common to the neuronal migration of embryonic and adult neuroblasts.
However, the neuroblasts generated in the adult brain apparently use distinct directional cues, and require special scaffolds to move through the relatively disadvantageous environment. Thus, regulatory mechanisms that are common from the
embryonic to the adult stage and those that are adult specific both contribute to
neuronal migration in the adult brain. Further study should help clarify the detailed
regulation as well as the functions of neuronal migration in the adult brain.

References
Alvarez-Buylla, A., and Garcia-Verdugo, J.M. (2002). Neurogenesis in adult subventricular zone.
J Neurosci 22, 629–634.
Andrade, N., Komnenovic, V., Blake, S.M., Jossin, Y., Howell, B., Goffinet, A., Schneider, W.J.,
and Nimpf, J. (2007). ApoER2/VLDL receptor and Dab1 in the rostral migratory stream function in postnatal neuronal migration independently of Reelin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104,
8508–8513.
Anton, E.S., Ghashghaei, H.T., Weber, J.L., McCann, C., Fischer, T.M., Cheung, I.D., Gassmann, M.,
Messing, A., Klein, R., Schwab, M.H., et al. (2004). Receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB4 modulates neuroblast migration and placement in the adult forebrain. Nat Neurosci 7, 1319–1328.
Arvidsson, A., Collin, T., Kirik, D., Kokaia, Z., and Lindvall, O. (2002). Neuronal replacement
from endogenous precursors in the adult brain after stroke. Nat Med 8, 963–970.
Bellion, A., Baudoin, J.P., Alvarez, C., Bornens, M., and Metin, C. (2005). Nucleokinesis in tangentially migrating neurons comprises two alternating phases: forward migration of the Golgi/
centrosome associated with centrosome splitting and myosin contraction at the rear. J Neurosci
25, 5691–5699.
Belvindrah, R., Hankel, S., Walker, J., Patton, B.L., and Muller, U. (2007). Beta1 integrins
­control the formation of cell chains in the adult rostral migratory stream. J Neurosci 27,
2704–2717.
Blake, S.M., Strasser, V., Andrade, N., Duit, S., Hofbauer, R., Schneider, W.J., and Nimpf, J. (2008).
Thrombospondin-1 binds to ApoER2 and VLDL receptor and functions in postnatal neuronal
migration. EMBO J 27, 3069–3080.
Bolteus, A.J., and Bordey, A. (2004). GABA release and uptake regulate neuronal precursor
migration in the postnatal subventricular zone. J Neurosci 24, 7623–7631.

352

M. Sawada et al.

Bovetti, S., Bovolin, P., Perroteau, I., and Puche, A.C. (2007a). Subventricular zone-derived
­neuroblast migration to the olfactory bulb is modulated by matrix remodelling. Eur J Neurosci
25, 2021–2033.
Bovetti, S., Hsieh, Y.C., Bovolin, P., Perroteau, I., Kazunori, T., and Puche, A.C. (2007b). Blood
vessels form a scaffold for neuroblast migration in the adult olfactory bulb. J Neurosci 27,
5976–5980.
Brose, K., Bland, K.S., Wang, K.H., Arnott, D., Henzel, W., Goodman, C.S., Tessier-Lavigne, M.,
and Kidd, T. (1999). Slit proteins bind Robo receptors and have an evolutionarily conserved
role in repulsive axon guidance. Cell 96, 795–806.
Chazal, G., Durbec, P., Jankovski, A., Rougon, G., and Cremer, H. (2000). Consequences of neural
cell adhesion molecule deficiency on cell migration in the rostral migratory stream of the
mouse. J Neurosci 20, 1446–1457.
Chiaramello, S., Dalmasso, G., Bezin, L., Marcel, D., Jourdan, F., Peretto, P., Fasolo, A., and De
Marchis, S. (2007). BDNF/ TrkB interaction regulates migration of SVZ precursor cells via
PI3-K and MAP-K signalling pathways. Eur J Neurosci 26, 1780–1790.
Conover, J.C., Doetsch, F., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., Gale, N.W., Yancopoulos, G.D., and AlvarezBuylla, A. (2000). Disruption of Eph/ephrin signaling affects migration and proliferation in the
adult subventricular zone. Nat Neurosci 3, 1091–1097.
Cremer, H., Lange, R., Christoph, A., Plomann, M., Vopper, G., Roes, J., Brown, R., Baldwin, S.,
Kraemer, P., Scheff, S., et al. (1994). Inactivation of the N-CAM gene in mice results in size
reduction of the olfactory bulb and deficits in spatial learning. Nature 367, 455–459.
Curtis, M.A., Kam, M., Nannmark, U., Anderson, M.F., Axell, M.Z., Wikkelso, C., Holtas, S., van
Roon-Mom, W.M., Bjork-Eriksson, T., Nordborg, C., et  al. (2007). Human neuroblasts
migrate to the olfactory bulb via a lateral ventricular extension. Science 315, 1243–1249.
Doetsch, F., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (1996). Network of tangential pathways for neuronal migration in adult mammalian brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93, 14895–14900.
Emsley, J.G., and Hagg, T. (2003). alpha6beta1 integrin directs migration of neuronal precursors
in adult mouse forebrain. Exp Neurol 183, 273–285.
Etienne-Manneville, S., and Hall, A. (2003). Cdc42 regulates GSK-3beta and adenomatous polyposis coli to control cell polarity. Nature 421, 753–756.
Garzotto, D., Giacobini, P., Crepaldi, T., Fasolo, A., and De Marchis, S. (2008). Hepatocyte
growth factor regulates migration of olfactory interneuron precursors in the rostral migratory
stream through Met-Grb2 coupling. J Neurosci 28, 5901–5909.
Gascon E, Vutskits L, Kiss JZ (2010) The role of PSA-NCAM in adult neurogenesis. Adv Exp
Med Biol 663, 127–136.
Gil-Perotin, S., Duran-Moreno, M., Belzunegui, S., Luquin, M.R., and Garcia-Verdugo, J.M.
(2009). Ultrastructure of the subventricular zone in Macaca fascicularis and evidence of a
mouse-like migratory stream. J Comp Neurol 514, 533–554.
Guan, K.L., and Rao, Y. (2003). Signalling mechanisms mediating neuronal responses to guidance
cues. Nat Rev Neurosci 4, 941–956.
Hack, I., Bancila, M., Loulier, K., Carroll, P., and Cremer, H. (2002). Reelin is a detachment signal
in tangential chain-migration during postnatal neurogenesis. Nat Neurosci 5, 939–945.
Hayashi, T., Noshita, N., Sugawara, T., and Chan, P.H. (2003). Temporal profile of angiogenesis and
expression of related genes in the brain after ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 23,
166–180.
Higginbotham, H., Tanaka, T., Brinkman, B.C., and Gleeson, J.G. (2006). GSK3beta and PKCzeta
function in centrosome localization and process stabilization during Slit-mediated neuronal
repolarization. Mol Cell Neurosci 32, 118–132.
Hirota, Y., Ohshima, T., Kaneko, N., Ikeda, M., Iwasato, T., Kulkarni, A.B., Mikoshiba, K.,
Okano, H., and Sawamoto, K. (2007). Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 is required for control
of neuroblast migration in the postnatal subventricular zone. J Neurosci 27,
12829–12838.
Hu, H. (1999). Chemorepulsion of neuronal migration by Slit2 in the developing mammalian
forebrain. Neuron 23, 703–711.

14  Neuronal Migration in the Adult Brain

353

Hu, H., and Rutishauser, U. (1996). A septum-derived chemorepulsive factor for migrating olfactory
interneuron precursors. Neuron 16, 933–940.
Imitola, J., Raddassi, K., Park, K.I., Mueller, F.J., Nieto, M., Teng, Y.D., Frenkel, D., Li, J.,
Sidman, R.L., Walsh, C.A., et al. (2004). Directed migration of neural stem cells to sites of
CNS injury by the stromal cell-derived factor 1alpha/CXC chemokine receptor 4 pathway.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101, 18117–18122.
Kam, M., Curtis, M.A., McGlashan, S.R., Connor, B., Nannmark, U., and Faull, R.L. (2009). The
cellular composition and morphological organization of the rostral migratory stream in the
adult human brain. J Chem Neuroanat 37, 196–205.
Kaneko, N., Marín, O., Koike, M., Hirota, Y., Uchiyama, Y., Wu, J.Y., Lu, Q., Tessier-Lavigne,
M., Alvarez-Buylla, A., Okano, H., et al. (2010). New neurons clear the path of astrocytic
processes for their rapid migration in the adult brain. Neuron 67, 213–223.
Kirschenbaum, B., Doetsch, F., Lois, C., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (1999). Adult subventricular
zone neuronal precursors continue to proliferate and migrate in the absence of the olfactory
bulb. J Neurosci 19, 2171–2180.
Koizumi, H., Higginbotham, H., Poon, T., Tanaka, T., Brinkman, B.C., and Gleeson, J.G. (2006).
Doublecortin maintains bipolar shape and nuclear translocation during migration in the adult
forebrain. Nat Neurosci 9, 779–786.
Kojima, T., Hirota, Y., Ema, M., Takahashi, S., Miyoshi, I., Okano, H., and Sawamoto, K. (2010).
Subventricular zone-derived neural progenitor cells migrate along a blood vessel scaffold
toward the post-stroke striatum. Stem Cells 28, 545–554.
Kornack, D.R., and Rakic, P. (2001). The generation, migration, and differentiation of olfactory
neurons in the adult primate brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98, 4752–4757.
Lee, S.R., Kim, H.Y., Rogowska, J., Zhao, B.Q., Bhide, P., Parent, J.M., and Lo, E.H. (2006).
Involvement of matrix metalloproteinase in neuroblast cell migration from the subventricular
zone after stroke. J Neurosci 26, 3491–3495.
Li, H.S., Chen, J.H., Wu, W., Fagaly, T., Zhou, L., Yuan, W., Dupuis, S., Jiang, Z.H., Nash, W.,
Gick, C., et al. (1999). Vertebrate slit, a secreted ligand for the transmembrane protein roundabout, is a repellent for olfactory bulb axons. Cell 96, 807–818.
Liu, G., and Rao, Y. (2003). Neuronal migration from the forebrain to the olfactory bulb requires
a new attractant persistent in the olfactory bulb. J Neurosci 23, 6651–6659.
Lois, C., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (1994). Long-distance neuronal migration in the adult mammalian brain. Science 264, 1145–1148.
Lois, C., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (1996). Chain migration of neuronal precursors. Science 271, 978–981.
Luskin, M.B. (1993). Restricted proliferation and migration of postnatally generated neurons
derived from the forebrain subventricular zone. Neuron 11, 173–189.
Mason, H.A., Ito, S., and Corfas, G. (2001). Extracellular signals that regulate the tangential
migration of olfactory bulb neuronal precursors: inducers, inhibitors, and repellents. J Neurosci
21, 7654–7663.
Merkle, F.T., Mirzadeh, Z., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2007). Mosaic organization of neural stem
cells in the adult brain. Science 317, 381–384.
Murase, S., and Horwitz, A.F. (2002). Deleted in colorectal carcinoma and differentially expressed
integrins mediate the directional migration of neural precursors in the rostral migratory stream.
J Neurosci 22, 3568–3579.
Murase, S., Cho, C., White, J.M., and Horwitz, A.F. (2008). ADAM2 promotes migration of neuroblasts in the rostral migratory stream to the olfactory bulb. Eur J Neurosci 27, 1585–1595.
Ng, K.L., Li, J.D., Cheng, M.Y., Leslie, F.M., Lee, A.G., and Zhou, Q.Y. (2005). Dependence of
olfactory bulb neurogenesis on prokineticin 2 signaling. Science 308, 1923–1927.
Nguyen-Ba-Charvet, K.T., Picard-Riera, N., Tessier-Lavigne, M., Baron-Van Evercooren, A.,
Sotelo, C., and Chedotal, A. (2004). Multiple roles for slits in the control of cell migration in
the rostral migratory stream. J Neurosci 24, 1497–1506.
Ohab, J.J., Fleming, S., Blesch, A., and Carmichael, S.T. (2006). A neurovascular niche for neurogenesis after stroke. J Neurosci 26, 13007–13016.

354

M. Sawada et al.

Okuyama-Yamamoto, A., Yamamoto, T., Miki, A., and Terashima, T. (2005). Changes in reelin
expression in the mouse olfactory bulb after chemical lesion to the olfactory epithelium. Eur J
Neurosci 21, 2586–2592.
Ono, K., Tomasiewicz, H., Magnuson, T., and Rutishauser, U. (1994). N-CAM mutation inhibits
tangential neuronal migration and is phenocopied by enzymatic removal of polysialic acid.
Neuron 13, 595–609.
Paratcha, G., Ibanez, C.F., and Ledda, F. (2006). GDNF is a chemoattractant factor for neuronal
precursor cells in the rostral migratory stream. Mol Cell Neurosci 31, 505–514.
Parent, J.M., Vexler, Z.S., Gong, C., Derugin, N., and Ferriero, D.M. (2002). Rat forebrain neurogenesis and striatal neuron replacement after focal stroke. Ann Neurol 52, 802–813.
Pencea, V., Bingaman, K.D., Freedman, L.J., and Luskin, M.B. (2001). Neurogenesis in the subventricular zone and rostral migratory stream of the neonatal and adult primate forebrain. Exp
Neurol 172, 1–16.
Puverel, S., Nakatani, H., Parras, C., and Soussi-Yanicostas, N. (2009). Prokineticin receptor 2
expression identifies migrating neuroblasts and their subventricular zone transient-amplifying
progenitors in adult mice. J Comp Neurol 512, 232–242.
Quinones-Hinojosa, A., Sanai, N., Soriano-Navarro, M., Gonzalez-Perez, O., Mirzadeh, Z., GilPerotin, S., Romero-Rodriguez, R., Berger, M.S., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., and Alvarez-Buylla, A.
(2006). Cellular composition and cytoarchitecture of the adult human subventricular zone: a
niche of neural stem cells. J Comp Neurol 494, 415–434.
Saghatelyan, A., de Chevigny, A., Schachner, M., and Lledo, P.M. (2004). Tenascin-R mediates
activity-dependent recruitment of neuroblasts in the adult mouse forebrain. Nat Neurosci 7,
347–356.
Sanai, N., Tramontin, A.D., Quinones-Hinojosa, A., Barbaro, N.M., Gupta, N., Kunwar, S.,
Lawton, M.T., McDermott, M.W., Parsa, A.T., Manuel-Garcia Verdugo, J., et  al. (2004).
Unique astrocyte ribbon in adult human brain contains neural stem cells but lacks chain migration. Nature 427, 740–744.
Sawamoto, K., Hirota, Y., Alfaro-Cervello, C., Soriano-Navarro, M., He, X., Hayakawa-Yano, Y.,
Yamada, M., Hikishima, K., Tabata, H., Iwanami, A., et al. (2011). Cellular composition and
organization of the subventricular zone and rostral migratory stream in the adult and neonatal
common marmoset brain. J Comp Neurol 519, 690–713.
Sawamoto, K., Wichterle, H., Gonzalez-Perez, O., Cholfin, J.A., Yamada, M., Spassky, N.,
Murcia, N.S., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., Marin, O., Rubenstein, J.L., et al. (2006). New neurons
follow the flow of cerebrospinal fluid in the adult brain. Science 311, 629–632.
Schaar, B.T., and McConnell, S.K. (2005). Cytoskeletal coordination during neuronal migration.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102, 13652–13657.
Shen, Q., Goderie, S.K., Jin, L., Karanth, N., Sun, Y., Abramova, N., Vincent, P., Pumiglia, K.,
and Temple, S. (2004). Endothelial cells stimulate self-renewal and expand neurogenesis of
neural stem cells. Science 304, 1338–1340.
Snapyan, M., Lemasson, M., Brill, M.S., Blais, M., Massouh, M., Ninkovic, J., Gravel, C.,
Berthod, F., Gotz, M., Barker, P.A., et al. (2009). Vasculature guides migrating neuronal precursors in the adult mammalian forebrain via brain-derived neurotrophic factor signaling.
J Neurosci 29, 4172–4188.
Solecki, D.J., Model, L., Gaetz, J., Kapoor, T.M., and Hatten, M.E. (2004). Par6alpha signaling
controls glial-guided neuronal migration. Nat Neurosci 7, 1195–1203.
Tanaka, T., Serneo, F.F., Higgins, C., Gambello, M.J., Wynshaw-Boris, A., and Gleeson, J.G.
(2004). Lis1 and doublecortin function with dynein to mediate coupling of the nucleus to the
centrosome in neuronal migration. J Cell Biol 165, 709–721.
Thored, P., Arvidsson, A., Cacci, E., Ahlenius, H., Kallur, T., Darsalia, V., Ekdahl, C.T., Kokaia,
Z., and Lindvall, O. (2006). Persistent production of neurons from adult brain stem cells during
recovery after stroke. Stem Cells 24, 739–747.
Thored, P., Wood, J., Arvidsson, A., Cammenga, J., Kokaia, Z., and Lindvall, O. (2007). Longterm neuroblast migration along blood vessels in an area with transient angiogenesis and
increased vascularization after stroke. Stroke 38, 3032–3039.

14  Neuronal Migration in the Adult Brain

355

Tsai, L.H., and Gleeson, J.G. (2005). Nucleokinesis in neuronal migration. Neuron 46, 383–388.
Umeshima, H., Hirano, T., and Kengaku, M. (2007). Microtubule-based nuclear movement occurs
independently of centrosome positioning in migrating neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104,
16182–16187.
Wichterle, H., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (1997). Direct evidence for homotypic, glia-independent neuronal migration. Neuron 18, 779–791.
Wong, K., Ren, X.R., Huang, Y.Z., Xie, Y., Liu, G., Saito, H., Tang, H., Wen, L., Brady-Kalnay, S.M.,
Mei, L., et al. (2001). Signal transduction in neuronal migration: roles of GTPase activating
proteins and the small GTPase Cdc42 in the Slit-Robo pathway. Cell 107, 209–221.
Wu, W., Wong, K., Chen, J., Jiang, Z., Dupuis, S., Wu, J.Y., and Rao, Y. (1999). Directional guidance of neuronal migration in the olfactory system by the protein Slit. Nature 400, 331–336.
Yamashita, T., Ninomiya, M., Hernandez Acosta, P., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., Sunabori, T.,
Sakaguchi, M., Adachi, K., Kojima, T., Hirota, Y., Kawase, T., et al. (2006). Subventricular
zone-derived neuroblasts migrate and differentiate into mature neurons in the post-stroke adult
striatum. J Neurosci 26, 6627–6636.
Yan, Y.P., Sailor, K.A., Lang, B.T., Park, S.W., Vemuganti, R., and Dempsey, R.J. (2007).
Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 plays a critical role in neuroblast migration after focal
cerebral ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 27, 1213–1224.
Zhang, R.L., Chopp, M., Gregg, S.R., Toh, Y., Roberts, C., Letourneau, Y., Buller, B., Jia, L., S,
P.N.D., and Zhang, Z.G. (2009). Patterns and dynamics of subventricular zone neuroblast
migration in the ischemic striatum of the adult mouse. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 29,
1240–1250.

Chapter 15

Development and Survival of Adult-Born
Olfactory Neurons
Masahiro Yamaguchi

Abstract  In rodents, the olfactory bulb is located at the rostral end of the brain,
where it forms part of the telencephalon. The olfactory bulb first develops in the
midembryonic period as an evagination from the rostral tip of the telencephalon
(Hinds, 1968b). Mitral and tufted cells, the bulbar excitatory projection neurons,
are produced during the mid- to late embryonic period (Hinds, 1968a; Bayer, 1983),
whereas granule cells and periglomerular cells, the bulbar local interneurons, are
generated extensively during the late embryonic and early neonatal periods, with
production continuing in adulthood. This adult neurogenesis of bulbar interneurons
may be responsible for the high plasticity that characterizes information processing
in the olfactory bulb. Animals are required to adapt to environments with ­various
odors in daily life. Bulbar interneurons generated in adulthood may increase the
plasticity of olfaction such that animals can choose appropriate behavioral
responses in circumstances with changing odors. Because not all new neurons are
integrated into preexisting circuits, adult neurogenesis is in one sense wasteful; in
the olfactory bulb also, only half of new interneurons are integrated into the ­bulbar
circuitry while the other half are eliminated (Petreanu and Alvarez-Buylla, 2002;
Winner et al., 2002). Adult neurogenesis therefore resembles embryonic development, in that neurons are initially prepared in excess, many of which are subsequently eliminated. This selection process during development is crucial to ensuring
that the neuronal circuitry has been appropriately tuned to provide proper information processing (Buss et al., 2006). A similar selection process occurs in the olfactory bulb of adult mammals, where it allows the bulbar circuit to select the
appropriate type and ­number of neurons from among excess pools of new neurons
in accordance with the ­particular requirements of the odor situation in which the
animal finds itself. The mechanism by which adult-born neurons are selected, in other
words, their fate of survival or death, is therefore key to understanding how adultborn bulbar interneurons contribute to the functional plasticity of the bulbar circuitry.

M. Yamaguchi (*)
Department of Physiology, Graduate School of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
e-mail: yamaguti@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp
T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_15, © Springer 2011

357

358

M. Yamaguchi

In this section, we first address how the survival or death of adult-born neurons is
controlled. We then compare the development and survival of adult- and neonateborn neurons to investigate how the integrity of the bulbar circuit is maintained and
remodeled by adult-born neurons. Although two major types of interneurons are
found, periglomerular cells and granule cells, the major population of adult-born
interneurons are granule cells. This chapter therefore focuses mainly on the properties of granule cells.

15.1 Part I: Survival and Death of Adult-Born Interneurons
The olfactory bulb is considered a unique region in the brain, in that inhibitory
interneurons outnumber excitatory projection neurons. The total number of granule
cells in the adult rat olfactory bulb is calculated to be around ten million, which is
two orders of magnitude larger than that of mitral/tufted cells (Kaplan et al., 1985).
The number of adult-born bulbar interneurons is also large. In rodents, at least
­several tens of thousands of neurons enter the olfactory bulb each day (AlvarezBuylla et al., 2001; Winner et al., 2002; Lledo et al., 2006), corresponding to roughly
1% of the total granule cell number. Thus, a simple calculation suggests that adultborn interneurons will outnumber preexisting interneurons within 100  days. This
numerical profile suggests a critical role for interneurons, including adult-born
interneurons, in the processing of odor information in the olfactory bulb.
Because the selection process through which adult-born interneurons pass necessarily involves extensive neuronal elimination (Buss et al., 2006), the number of apoptotic interneurons in the adult olfactory system is accordingly large. Apoptotic cells are
found in the subventricular zone, rostral migratory stream, and olfactory bulb (Biebl
et al., 2000; Mandairon et al., 2003), indicating that selection occurs throughout the
neurogenic routes. When the absolute number of apoptotic cells was compared among
different neurogenic areas, close to 80% were found in the olfactory bulb (Biebl et al.,
2000), indicating that the selection of adult-born interneurons occurs mostly after they
enter the olfactory bulb. Among newly arrived bulbar interneurons, nearly half are
integrated into the bulbar circuitry and survive over a period of months whereas the
rest are eliminated within several weeks (Petreanu and Alvarez-Buylla, 2002; Winner
et al., 2002; Yamaguchi and Mori, 2005). Regulation of the survival and death of adultborn interneurons is crucial to appropriate structural and ­functional improvements in
the bulbar circuitry. The following sections introduce several examples of how the
survival and death of adult-born interneurons in the olfactory bulb are regulated.

15.1.1 Olfactory Sensory Experience
Olfaction plays a key role in many areas of animal behavior, including feeding,
­mating, avoidance of predators, and territorial marking (Doty, 1986). Animals
experience various odors in daily life. Considering the importance of adult-born

15  Development and Survival of Adult-Born Olfactory Neurons

359

interneurons in adapting to the changing odorous environment, their survival and
death is likely under the control of olfactory sensory experience, and many studies
have shown that deprivation of olfactory sensory input increases the number of
apoptotic cells in the olfactory bulb (Corotto et al., 1994; Najbauer and Leon, 1995;
Fiske and Brunjes, 2001a,b). It has been postulated that apoptotic cells in the olfactory bulb represent the cell death of adult-born interneurons and that olfactory
sensory deprivation decreases the survival of adult-born interneurons. In this
regard, survival of adult-born granule cells was decreased in anosmic mice lacking
a cyclic nucleotide-gated channel in olfactory sensory neurons (Petreanu and
Alvarez-Buylla, 2002) and was increased in mice repeatedly exposed to novel
odors (odor-enriched environment) (Rochefort et al., 2002). These findings clearly
show that olfactory sensory experience promotes the survival of adult-born
interneurons whereas sensory deprivation decreases it. Modulation of olfactory
sensory experience did not significantly influence the proliferation of progenitors
in the subventricular zone (Petreanu and Alvarez-Buylla, 2002; Rochefort et  al.,
2002). Thus, olfactory sensory experience regulates the final number of adult-born
interneurons integrated into the bulbar circuitry mainly by controlling the survival
and death of these cells within the olfactory bulb.
In general, sensory experience-dependent plastic change in the central nervous
system is subject to the influence of time windows. One well-known example is the
plasticity of ocular dominance (Hensch, 2005): deprivation of visual input from one
eye shifts the response property of binocular zone neurons in the visual cortex
preferentially toward the nondeprived eye input. This ocular dominance plasticity
occurs during a specific period after birth, called the critical period. The ­dependence
of the fate choice of adult-born bulbar interneurons between survival and death on
sensory experience raises the possibility that it may have a critical time window,
and that this window may depend on the age of the individual adult-born neurons
themselves rather than on the age of the animals. In anosmic mice, the number of
adult-born granule cells at day 14 after generation was comparable to that of wildtype mice, whereas that at day 45 was significantly decreased, suggesting that the
influence of sensory deprivation on survival becomes conspicuous at later than
14  days after generation (Petreanu and Alvarez-Buylla, 2002). When wild-type
mice were deprived of olfactory sensory input at various periods by naris cauterization, deprivation at 14–28 days after generation remarkably reduced the survival of
new interneurons, whereas that before or after this period showed no significant
effect (Yamaguchi and Mori, 2005). Many of the apoptotic granule cells were aged
14–28 days (Fig. 15.1). These observations indicate that the period of 14–28 days
after generation is the critical period for bulbar interneurons when ­survival and
death are strongly regulated by olfactory sensory experience.
What mechanisms determine the survival and death of adult-born interneurons
during the critical period? Morphological analysis of adult-born interneurons by
retroviral labeling showed the extensive development of synaptic structures on the
dendrites of new granule cells on days 14–28 after generation (Petreanu and
Alvarez-Buylla, 2002). Functional analysis by patch-clamp recording showed that
new granule cells begin to receive glutamatergic synaptic input at around day 14, and

360

M. Yamaguchi

Fig. 15.1  Apoptotic granule cells in the olfactory bulb. Apoptotic granule cells can be seen by
immunostaining with anti-activated caspase-3 antibody (green). (a) Apoptotic granule cells in the
control olfactory bulb. (b) Increased number of apoptotic granule cells in the sensory-deprived
olfactory bulb. (c) Many apoptotic granule cells in the sensory-deprived olfactory bulb have apical
dendrites that elongate into external plexiform layer (arrow). Blue, DAPI (4¢,6″-diamino-2phenylindole·2HCl) staining. Bars (a,b) 100 mm; (c) 20 mm. (Modified from Yamaguchi and Mori
2005. Copyright 2005, National Academy of Sciences, USA.)

that these connections continue to develop before plateauing at a similar degree of
development to that in preexisting mature granule cells by around day 28
(Carleton et  al., 2003). The critical period for the survival and death decision of
adult-born granule cells roughly matches the period when they develop glutamatergic synaptic connections with preexisting neurons, and glutamatergic input onto new
bulbar interneurons is thus a plausible candidate for the control of the fate of these
cells during the critical period (Fig. 15.2). Mature granule cells in the olfactory bulb
receive glutamatergic input from three origins (Shepherd et al., 2004): in the external
plexiform layer, they make dendrodendritic reciprocal synapses with secondary
dendrites of mitral/tufted cells and receive glutamatergic input from these structures;
in the granule cell layer, they make axodendritic glutamatergic synapses with centrifugal axons of olfactory cortical neurons; and granule cell dendrites in the granule
cell layer also make axodendritic glutamatergic synapses with axon collaterals of
mitral/tufted cells. The time course of synapse formation from these different origins
onto adult-born interneurons was recently clarified (Whitman and Greer, 2007;
Kelsch et al., 2008). Adult-born granule cells first form synapses in the granule cell
layer at around day 14, whereas synapse formation in the external plexiform layer is
delayed, becoming apparent around day 21. By day 28, all synaptic structures are
indistinguishable from those of preexisting mature granule cells. The development
of glutamatergic synaptic input onto adult-born granule cells is thus both spatially
and temporally regulated, and development occurs mostly during the period critical

15  Development and Survival of Adult-Born Olfactory Neurons

361

Fig.  15.2  Fate decision of adult-born granule cells between survival and death. Survival and
death of adult-born bulbar interneurons are regulated by olfactory sensory experience. Middle:
The critical period for the sensory experience-dependent fate decision corresponds to the period
of synaptogenesis. Adult-born granule cells around the critical period form synapses in the external plexiform layer (EPL) with secondary dendrites of mitral/tufted cells and in the granule cell
layer (GCL) with several origins including centrifugal axons of olfactory cortical neurons and
axon collaterals of mitral/tufted cells. Left: Synaptic input through these structures may support
the survival of adult-born granule cells during the critical period. Then, the new granule cells are
integrated in the bulbar circuitry. Right: Deprivation of synaptic input enhances cell death to the
adult-born granule cells during the critical period. Those cells are eliminated from the bulbar
circuitry

to the sensory experience-dependent ­survival and death decision. An understanding
of the individual and combined roles of these glutamatergic synaptic inputs from
different origins may provide important clues to determining the fate decision
mechanism of adult-born interneurons.
Overall, these findings suggest that olfactory sensory experience promotes the
survival of adult-born interneurons. This concept does not always hold true, ­however:
although the survival of new interneurons in adult mice increased when they were
subject to an olfactory discrimination task on day 21–28 after generation, supporting
the survival-promoting effect of olfactory sensory experience (Alonso et al., 2006),
survival conversely decreased when a similar but not identical task was conducted
on day 30–40 after generation (Mandairon et al., 2006a). To ­preclude differences in
experimental conditions other than the period of task ­application, the same odor task
was applied to adult mice at various periods after bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)
­labeling of adult-born interneurons (Mouret et al., 2008). Testing during days 11–30
after cell generation increased their survival whereas that during days 30–38
decreased it; testing before or after these periods showed no significant influence.
These findings strengthen the view that the ­survival of adult-born interneurons is
subject to a period of sensitivity to olfactory sensory experience, but further show

362

M. Yamaguchi

that survival can be conversely decreased when exposure occurs outside the
so-called critical period. This bimodal effect of olfactory sensory experience might
be understood from differences in the ­differentiation and maturation of glutamatergic input on interneurons of different ages. In neocortical pyramidal neurons, deprivation of sensory input prevents the loss of spines, suggesting that sensory experience
plays a positive role in the loss of synaptic structures (Zuo et  al., 2005). Another
example of the sensory ­experience-dependent refinement of neuronal circuitry might
be the enhancement of bulbar neuronal loss by olfactory sensory experience.

15.1.2 Neuromodulatory Systems
The sense of smell does not depend solely on peripheral odor input from the ­external
environment. Olfaction is also influenced by the state or condition of the animal
itself, such as its attention to and motivation toward odor detection (Doty, 1986).
These states are at least partly mediated by neuromodulatory systems. The olfactory
bulb is targeted by several subcortical neuromodulatory systems (Shipley and Ennis,
1996), namely, cholinergic input from the horizontal limb of the ­diagonal band,
noradrenergic input from the locus coeruleus, and serotonergic input from the raphe
nuclei. Because most of the neuromodulatory fibers terminate on granule and periglomerular cells (Shepherd et  al., 2004), these neuromodulatory inputs are also
candidates as direct regulators of the survival and death of ­adult-born interneurons.
Cholinergic fibers innervate all layers of the olfactory bulb, from the granule cell
layer to the glomerular layer (Kasa et  al., 1995). Adult-born interneurons also
receive these neuromodulatory inputs during their maturation. Acetylcholine receptors are expressed in adult-born interneurons, and cholinergic axon terminals make
contact with these interneurons (Kaneko et al., 2006; Whitman and Greer, 2007).
Modulation of cholinergic input has been shown to influence the survival and death
of adult-born interneurons in a variety of ways. For example, ablation of cholinergic neurons of the diagonal band by toxin infusion decreased the survival of
adult-born bulbar interneurons (Cooper-Kuhn et al., 2004), whereas enhancement
of the cholinergic system by systemic administration of an acetylcholinesterase
inhibitor increased the survival of adult-born interneurons (Kaneko et al., 2006). On
the other hand, selective ablation of nicotinic acetylcholine beta-2 receptor
enhanced granule cell survival (Mechawar et al., 2004). These various effects of the
cholinergic system may depend on the expression of different types of acetylcholine
receptors on adult-born interneurons or may reflect the indirect as well as direct
influence of cholinergic systems on the survival of bulbar interneurons.
With regard to the adrenergic and noradrenergic systems in the olfactory bulb,
noradrenergic fibers from the locus coeruleus are distributed predominantly in the
granule cell layer (McLean et  al., 1989; McLean and Shipley, 1991), whereas
adrenergic receptors (beta-1 and beta-2) are expressed widely in all layers (Woo
and Leon, 1995). Application of a noradrenergic agonist to cultured bulbar neurons
activated their Erk/MAPK pathway, which was assumed to enhance the survival of

15  Development and Survival of Adult-Born Olfactory Neurons

363

young neurons (Miwa and Storm, 2005), while that of a noradrenergic antagonist
blocked the odor enrichment-induced enhancement of survival of adult-born bulbar
interneurons (Veyrac et  al., 2009). The importance of noradrenergic signaling in
odor memory formation was first documented in neonatal rats (Sullivan et  al.,
1989). Given the extensive development of noradrenergic connections during the
postnatal period (McLean and Shipley, 1991), noradrenergic input may regulate
both olfactory memory and neuronal survival in the adult animals. In fact, application of a noradrenergic receptor antagonist attenuated the formation of short-term
­olfactory memory in adult mice (Veyrac et al., 2009).
The contribution of neuromodulation to olfactory memory has been well
­documented in the mating behavior of rodents. Pregnant female mice experience
abortion when exposed to pheromonal signals from an unfamiliar male but not
when exposed to those of the mated male (Brennan et  al., 1990). This type of
­olfactory memory (blockade of abortive response to a particular pheromonal signal)
requires the combination of peripheral pheromonal inputs of mating males and
centrifugal noradrenergic inputs to the accessory olfactory bulb during mating
behavior (Rosser and Keverne, 1985). This example indicates that the neuromodulatory system works in concert with peripheral sensory input, possibly under the
mediation of glutamatergic synaptic input. From this, we assume that neuromodulatory inputs on adult-born bulbar interneurons regulate their survival in combination
with their glutamatergic inputs, which convey odor information about the external
environment. Such integration of peripheral glutamatergic and centrifugal
­neuromodulatory inputs in adult-born interneurons might be the key regulatory
mechanism of their survival and death. Application of an olfactory discrimination
task more effectively promotes the survival of adult-born interneurons than the
simple delivery of novel odors (Alonso et al., 2006). Neuromodulatory input might
underlie the importance of behavioral context to the olfactory experience-dependent
survival and death of adult-born interneurons.

15.1.3 Long-Term Survival of Adult-Born Interneurons
After passing through the critical survival or death decision period, adult-born
interneurons become relatively stable and tend to exist for an extended period in the
preexisting bulbar circuitry. Regulation of this long-term survival is not well
­understood, however. Some observations show that new interneurons selected for
survival during the sensitive period continue to survive for more than a year, for
example, while others show a gradual decrease in number, with half eliminated
within a year (Winner et al., 2002; Petreanu and Alvarez-Buylla, 2002). Survival
may differ between species (rats and mice), as well as by housing conditions and
the animal age at cell labeling. Of note, the survival-promoting effect of olfactory
sensory experience is not necessarily long lasting. Olfactory sensory experience for
3 weeks after BrdU labeling enhanced the survival of adult-born granule cells, but
withdrawal of the experience after that period reduced survival to a level similar to
that of mice without the experience (Rochefort and Lledo, 2005). This result

364

M. Yamaguchi

i­ndicates that the survival of adult-born interneurons does not become refractory to
odor stimulation after the critical period and suggests that their long-term survival
may also be regulated by sensory experience after the critical period.

15.2 Part II: Preexisting and New Interneurons
15.2.1 Overall Contribution of Adult-Born Interneurons
in the Bulbar Circuitry
Adult-born interneurons integrate into the preexisting bulbar circuitry, which
­contains projection neurons generated in the embryonic period and interneurons
generated during the embryonic and younger postnatal periods (Hinds, 1968a,b;
Bayer, 1983; Lemasson et al., 2005). Although the number of new bulbar neurons
declines with age, neurogenesis continues even in 2-year-old mice (Enwere et al.,
2004). To what extent do adult-born interneurons contribute to the overall constitution of the bulbar circuitry in the adult? Volumetric studies in rodents suggest that
the olfactory bulb continues to grow during adulthood. The volume of the granule
cell layer of the mouse olfactory bulb increases about 1.2-fold from age 6 to
24  months (Mirich et  al., 2002); the absolute number of granule cells in the rat
olfactory bulb increases twofold from age 3 to 24  months (Kaplan et  al., 1985).
These observations suggest that adult-born neurons are continually added to the
bulbar circuit and contribute to the increase in granule cell number and olfactory
bulb size. Because pulse labeling of adult-born interneurons with BrdU analogues
or retroviral infection identifies only a small fraction of adult-born interneurons,
however, measuring the proportion of adult-born among all interneurons in the
adult bulbar circuitry has been difficult. To overcome this, a recent genetic
­technique has allowed the labeling of a much larger proportion of adult-born
interneurons (Lagace et al., 2007; Ninkovic et al., 2007; Imayoshi et al., 2008).
A Cre-mediated recombination system was modified so that recombination can be
triggered in adult progenitors by the application of an exogenous ligand (tamoxifen).
Tamoxifen application irreversibly induces recombination of the genome of the
adult progenitors, which allows the continual expression of marker proteins in the
progenitors and their descendent cells. Results for the proportion of labeled
­adult-born interneurons among all interneurons differ among studies, but all have
shown that adult-born interneurons gradually accumulate and increase in number
for at least several months after the initiation of gene recombination. In one study,
labeled adult-born granule cells accounted for nearly 20% of the total number of
granule cells, a proportion that remained stable between 4 and 9  months. This
­finding raises the possibility that adult-born granule cells may constitute a specific
cohort of cells that are repeatedly replaced by much younger adult-born granule
cells (Ninkovic et al., 2007). In another study, the proportion of labeled adult-born
granule cells continued to increase up to age 12 months to 60–70% of total granule

15  Development and Survival of Adult-Born Olfactory Neurons

365

cells, raising the possibility that these cells continue to accumulate and finally
account for the majority of all granule cells in the adult olfactory bulb (Imayoshi
et al., 2008). The actual proportion of adult-born granule cells remains unclear, but
the two models just described, repeated replacement and continual addition, are not
necessarily mutually exclusive; rather, these two modes of cell integration may
work together, to differing extents under different conditions. It is intriguing to
postulate the regulatory mechanisms that balance these two modes of integration of
adult-born interneurons.

15.2.2 Comparison of Neonate- and Adult-Born Interneurons
Understanding the role of adult-born interneurons in the structure and function of
the adult bulbar circuitry requires clarification of whether adult neurogenesis is
distinct from embryonic and neonatal neurogenesis. Results to date have identified
distinctions in not only the site of cell proliferation but also in the migration speed
of progenitors and the layer distribution of new interneurons in the olfactory bulb
(Lemasson et  al., 2005). The survival rate of new granule cells in the olfactory
bulb is also different. When neonate-born granule cells were labeled with BrdU,
the number of surviving cells at day 22 and day 60 did not significantly differ,
whereas the number of labeled adult-born granule cells at day 60 was decreased to
nearly half that at day 22 (Lemasson et al., 2005). Neonatal-born interneurons may
be heavily utilized in the construction of the functional bulbar circuitry, whereas
­adult-born interneurons might be utilized on demand when required for plastic
modulation of preexisting bulbar circuitry.
A second question is the long-term survival of embryonic or neonate-born
interneurons. The markedly high number of adult-born interneurons, representing as
much as 1% of total interneurons per day, suggests that preexisting interneurons,
including those neonate born, may be gradually eliminated and replaced by
­adult-born interneurons. In the in  vivo time-lapse imaging study, periglomerular
cells in the mouse olfactory bulb showed the disappearance of old cells and the
appearance of new ones in the same observation field, with a turnover rate of
approximately 3% per month (Mizrahi et al., 2006). Although the cellular age of the
lost neurons was unknown, this study was the first to show the replacement of
­preexisting bulbar interneurons with new bulbar interneurons in vivo. An interesting
question is then whether the loss of preexisting bulbar interneurons depends on the
arrival of new bulbar interneurons: in other words, do new interneurons drive out
preexisting interneurons, or do preexisting interneurons disappear by themselves
without the arrival of new interneurons? In genetically manipulated mice, the
­majority of adult-born bulbar interneurons were ablated by tamoxifen-induced toxin
expression (Imayoshi et  al., 2008). In intact mice, the number of BrdU-labeled
neonate-born granule cells gradually decreased during the adult period, indicating
that neonate-born preexisting granule cells are gradually eliminated. In mice in which
adult-born interneurons were ablated, the number of BrdU-labeled neonate-born­

366

M. Yamaguchi

g­ ranule cells decreased at a similar rate to that in intact animals. This result suggests
that the elimination of preexisting neonate-born granule cells can occur independently from the arrival of adult-born new granule cells. Preexisting bulbar interneurons may make “vacant rooms” in which the adult-born interneurons can integrate,
and thereby potentiate the plastic properties of the adult bulbar ­circuitry by replacing
old, stubborn interneurons with new, flexible interneurons.
Whatever the proportion of adult-born interneurons, it appears that not all
­preexisting interneurons are replaced in the adult. BrdU-labeled neonate-born
interneurons can be found in large numbers in the adult olfactory bulb (Lemasson
et al., 2005; Imayoshi et al., 2008). What kinds of cells are eliminated and what
kinds survive? Understanding this may reveal how some odor memories are kept
stable throughout life whereas others are forgotten or renewed during adulthood.
Both periglomerular and granule cells consist of distinct subtypes, classified by
molecular expression, layer distribution of the somata, dendritic arborization, and
targeting domain on principal neurons (Kosaka et al., 1995; Imamura et al., 2006;
Parrish-Aungst et al., 2007; Lledo et al., 2008; Naritsuka et al., 2009). Interestingly,
recent analyses have revealed that the subtypes generated in neonates and adults are
distinct (De Marchis et al., 2007; Merkle et al., 2007; Ninkovic et al., 2007; BatistaBrito et al., 2008). For example, neonate-born granule cells tend to be located in the
superficial portion of the granule cell layer and adult-born granule cells in the deep
portion (Lemasson et al., 2005; Imayoshi et al., 2008). Viral labeling experiments
show that neonate-born granule cells extend dendrites into the superficial portion
of the external plexiform layer and adult-born granule cells into the deep portion of
the layer (Kelsch et al., 2007). These observations are consistent with the overall
tendency of the dendritic arborization of granule cells whose somata are positioned
in different depths in the granule cell layer (Mori, 1987). Control of the survival and
death of individual subtypes of bulbar interneurons is an important point that
remains to be addressed. Olfactory sensory deprivation by naris cauterization
reduced the survival of adult-born granule cells in the deep portion of the granule
cell layer but did not significantly affect that of cells in the superficial portion
(Mandairon et al., 2006b), suggesting that sensory experience differently influences
the survival of different interneuron subtypes.

15.3 Summary
Olfaction plays a key role in many areas of animal behavior. The selection of appropriate behavioral responses in circumstances with various odors requires that the
olfactory system possess high plasticity. Adult-born bulbar interneurons may
greatly contribute to the plasticity of odor information processing in adult animals.
The selection of appropriate interneurons from among excess pools of new neurons
is considered a key mechanism in the remodeling of bulbar circuitry in accordance
with the requirements of the odorous situation. Many studies indicate the importance of olfactory sensory experience and the behavioral state of an animal to the
survival or death decision of adult-born interneurons. Plausible candidate mediators

15  Development and Survival of Adult-Born Olfactory Neurons

367

of this “external” and “internal” information are glutamatergic synaptic input and
neuromodulatory input. Adult-born interneurons integrate into preexisting bulbar
circuitry. Recent studies have revealed the differences in and relationships between
neonatal and adult neurogenesis. A clear understanding of this would help clarify
the functional significance of adult neurogenesis in the plasticity of olfaction in
adult animals.

References
Alonso, M., Viollet, C., Gabellec, M.M., Meas-Yedid, V., Olivo-Marin, J.C. & Lledo, P.M. (2006)
Olfactory discrimination learning increases the survival of adult-born neurons in the olfactory
bulb. Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 10508–10513.
Alvarez-Buylla, A., Garcia-Verdugo, J. & Tramontin A.D. (2001) A unified hypothesis on the
lineage of neural stem cells. Nature Reviews in Neuroscience, 2, 287–293.
Batista-Brito, R., Close, J., Machold, R. & Fishell, G. (2008) The distinct temporal origins of
olfactory bulb interneuron subtypes. Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 3966–3975.
Bayer, S.A. (1983) 3H-thymidine-radiographic studies of neurogenesis in the rat olfactory bulb.
Experimental Brain Research, 50, 329–340.
Biebl, M., Cooper, C.M., Winkler, J. & Kuhn, H.G. (2000) Analysis of neurogenesis and programmed
cell death reveals a self-renewing capacity in the adult rat brain. Neuroscience Letters, 291, 17–20.
Brennan, P., Kaba, H. & Keverne, E.B. (1990) Olfactory recognition: a simple memory system.
Science, 250, 1123–1126.
Buss, R.R., Sun, W. & Oppenheim, R.W. (2006) Adaptive roles of programmed cell death during
nervous system development. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 29, 1–35.
Carleton, A., Petreanu, L.T., Lansford, R., Alvarez-Buylla, A. & Lledo, P.M. (2003) Becoming a
new neuron in the adult olfactory bulb. Nature Neuroscience, 6, 507–518.
Cooper-Kuhn, C.M., Winkler, J. & Kuhn, H.G. (2004) Decreased neurogenesis after cholinergic
forebrain lesion in the adult rat. Journal of Neuroscience Research, 77, 155–165.
Corotto, F., Henegar, J. & Maruniak, J. (1994) Odor deprivation leads to reduced neurogenesis and
reduced neuronal survival in the olfactory bulb of the adult mouse. Neuroscience, 61, 739–744.
De Marchis, S., Bovetti, S., Carletti, B., Hsieh, Y.C., Garzotto, D., Peretto, P., Fasolo, A., Puche,
A.C. & Rossi, F. (2007) Generation of distinct types of periglomerular olfactory bulb interneurons during development and in adult mice: implication for intrinsic properties of the subventricular zone progenitor population. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 657–664.
Doty, R.L. (1986) Odor-guided behavior in mammals. Experientia. 42, 257–271.
Enwere, E., Shingo, T., Gregg, C., Fujikawa, H., Ohta, S. & Weiss, S. (2004) Aging results in
reduced epidermal growth factor receptor signaling, diminished olfactory neurogenesis, and
deficits in fine olfactory discrimination. Journal of Neuroscience, 24, 8354–8365.
Fiske, B. & Brunjes, P. (2001a) Cell death in the developing and sensory-deprived rat olfactory
bulb. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 431, 311–319.
Fiske, B. & Brunjes, P. (2001b) NMDA receptor regulation of cell death in the rat olfactory bulb.
Journal of Neurobiology, 47, 223–232.
Hensch, T.K. (2005) Critical period plasticity in local cortical circuits. Nature Reviews in
Neuroscience, 6, 877–888.
Hinds, J.W. (1968a) Autoradiographic study of histogenesis in the mouse olfactory bulb. I. Time
of origin of neurons and neuroglia. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 134, 287–304.
Hinds, J.W. (1968b) Autoradiographic study of histogenesis in the mouse olfactory bulb. II. Cell
proliferation and migration. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 134, 305–322.
Imamura, F., Nagao, H., Naritsuka, H., Murata, Y., Taniguchi, H. & Mori, K. (2006) A leucine-rich
repeat membrane protein, 5T4, is expressed by a subtype of granule cells with dendritic arbors in
specific strata of the mouse olfactory bulb. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 495, 754–768.

368

M. Yamaguchi

Imayoshi, I., Sakamoto, M., Ohtsuka, T., Takao, K., Miyakawa, T., Yamaguchi, M., Mori, K.,
Ikeda, T., Itohara, S. & Kageyama, R. (2008) Roles of continuous neurogenesis in the structural and functional integrity of the adult forebrain. Nature Neuroscience, 11, 1153–1161.
Kaneko, N., Okano, H. & Sawamoto, K. (2006) Role of cholinergic system in regulating survival
of newborn neurons in the adult mouse dentate gyrus and olfactory bulb. Genes to Cells. 11,
1145–1159.
Kaplan, M.S., McNelly, N.A. & Hinds, J.W. (1985) Population dynamics of adult-formed granule
neurons of the rat olfactory bulb. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 239, 117–125.
Kasa, P., Hlavati, I., Dobo, E., Wolff, A., Joo, F. & Wolff, J.R. (1995) Synaptic and non-synaptic
cholinergic innervation of the various types of neurons in the main olfactory bulb of adult rat:
immunocytochemistry of choline acetyltransferase. Neuroscience, 67, 667–677.
Kelsch, W., Mosley, C.P., Lin, C.W. & Lois, C. (2007) Distinct mammalian precursors are committed
to generate neurons with defined dendritic projection patterns. PLoS Biology, 5, 2501–2512.
Kelsch, W., Lin, C.W. & Lois, C. (2008) Sequential development of synapses in dendritic domains
during adult neurogenesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 105,
16803–16808.
Kosaka, K., Aika, Y., Toida, K., Heizmann, C.W., Huinziker, W., Jacobowitz, D.M., Nagatsu, I., Streit,
P., Visser, T.J. & Kosaka, T. (1995) Chemically defined neuron groups and their subpopulations
in the glomerular layer of the rat main olfactory bulb. Neuroscience Research, 23, 73–88.
Lagace, D.C., Whitman, M.C., Nooman, M.A., Ables, J.L., DeCarolis, N.A., Arguella, A.A.,
Donovan, M.H., Fischer, S.J., Farnbauch, L.A., Beech, R.D., DiLeone, R.J., Greer, C.A.,
Mandyam, C.D. & Eisch, A.J. (2007) Dynamic contribution of nestin-expressing stem cells to
adult neurogenesis. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 12623–12629.
Lemasson, M., Saghatelyan, A., Olivo-Marin, J.C. & Lledo, P.M. (2005) Neonatal and adult neurogenesis provide two distinct populations of newborn neurons to the mouse olfactory bulb.
Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 6816–6825.
Lledo, P.M., Alonso, M. & Grubb, M.S. (2006) Adult neurogenesis and functional plasticity in
neuronal circuits. Nature Reviews in Neuroscience. 7, 179–193.
Lledo, P.M., Merkle, F.T. & Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2008) Origin and function of olfactory bulb
interneuron diversity. Trends in Neuroscience, 31, 392–400.
Mandairon, N., Jourdan, F. & Didier, A. (2003) Deprivation of sensory inputs to the olfactory bulb
upregulates cell death and proliferation in the subventricular zone of adult mice. Neuroscience,
119, 507–516.
Mandairon, N., Sacquet, J., Garcia, S., Ravel, N., Jourdan, F. & Didier, A. (2006a) Neurogenic
correlates of an olfactory discrimination task in the adult olfactory bulb. European Journal of
Neuroscience, 24, 3578–3588.
Mandairon, N., Sacquet, J., Jourdan, F. & Didier, A. (2006b) Long-term fate and distribution of newborn cells in the adult mouse olfactory bulb: influences of olfactory deprivation. Neuroscience,
141, 443–451.
McLean, J.H. & Shipley, M.T. (1991) Postnatal development of the noradrenergic projection from
locus coeruleus to the olfactory bulb in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 304, 467–477.
McLean, J.H., Shipley, M.T., Nickell, W.T., Aston-Jones, G. & Reyher, C.K.H. (1989)
Chemoanatomical organization of the noradrenergic input from locus coeruleus to the olfactory bulb of the adult rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 285, 339–349.
Mechawar, N., Saghatelyan, A., Grailhe, R., Scoriels, L., Gheusi, G., Gabellec, M.M., Lledo, P.M.
& Changeux, J.P. (2004) Nicotinic receptors regulate the survival of newborn neurons in the adult
olfactory bulb. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 101, 9822–9826.
Merkle, F.T., Mirzadeh, Z. & Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2007) Mosaic organization of neural stem cells
in the adult brain. Science, 317, 381–384.
Mirich, J.M., Williams, N.C., Berlau, D.J. & Brunjes, P.C. (2002) Comparative study of aging in
the mouse olfactory bulb. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 454, 361–372.
Miwa, N. & Storm, D.R. (2005) Odorant-induced activation of extracellular signal-regulated
kinase/mitogen-activated protein kinase in the olfactory bulb promotes survival of newly
formed granule cells. Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 5404–5412.

15  Development and Survival of Adult-Born Olfactory Neurons

369

Mizrahi, A., Lu, J., Irving, R., Feng, G & Katz, L.C. (2006) In vivo imaging of juxtaglomerular
neuron turnover in the mouse olfactory bulb. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the USA, 103, 1912–1917.
Mori, K. (1987) Membrane and synaptic properties of identified neurons in the olfactory bulb.
Progress in Neurobiology, 29, 275–320.
Mouret, A., Gheusi, G., Gabellec, M.M., de Chaumont, F., Olivo-Martin, J.C. & Lledo, P.M. (2008)
Learning and survival of newly generated neurons: when time matters. Journal of Neuroscience, 28,
11511–11516.
Najbauer, J. & Leon, M. (1995) Olfactory experience modulates apoptosis in the developing olfactory bulb. Brain Research, 674, 245–251.
Naritsuka, H., Sakai, K., Hashikawa, T., Mori, K. & Yamaguchi, M. (2009) Perisomatic-targeting
granule cells in the mouse olfactory bulb. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 515, 409–426.
Ninkovic, J., Mori, T. & Gotz, M. (2007) Distinct modes of neuron addition in adult mouse neurogenesis. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 10906–10911.
Parrish-Aungst, S., Shipley, M.T., Erdelyi, F., Szabo, G. & Puche, A.C. (2007) Quantitative analysis of
neuronal diversity in the mouse olfactory bulb. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 501, 825–836.
Petreanu, L. & Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2002) Maturation and death of adult-born olfactory bulb granule neurons: role of olfaction. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 6106–6113.
Rochefort, C. & Lledo, P.M. (2005) Short-term survival of newborn neurons in the adult olfactory
bulb after exposure to a complex odor environment. European Journal of Neuroscience, 22,
2863–2870.
Rochefort, C., Gheusi, G., Vincent, J. & Lledo, P.M. (2002) Enriched odor exposure increases the
number of newborn neurons in the adult olfactory bulb and improves odor memory. Journal of
Neuroscience, 22, 2679–2689.
Rosser, A.E. & Keverne, E.B. (1985) The importance of central noradrenergic neurons in the formation
of an olfactory memory in the prevention of pregnancy block. Neuroscience, 15, 1141–1147.
Shepherd, G.M., Chen, W. & Greer, C. (2004) Olfactory bulb. In Shepherd, G. (ed) The synaptic
organization of the brain, fifth Edition. Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 165–216.
Shipley, M.T. & Ennis, M. (1996) Functional organization of olfactory system. Journal of
Neurobiology, 30, 123–176.
Sullivan, R.M., Wilson, D.A. & Leon, M. (1989) Norepinephrine and learning-induced plasticity
in infant rat olfactory system. Journal of Neuroscience, 9, 3998–4006.
Veyrac, A., Sacquet, J., Nguyen, V., Marien, M., Jourdan, F. & Didier, A. (2009) Novelty determines the effects of olfactory enrichment on memory and neurogenesis through noradrenergic
mechanisms. Neuropsychopharmacology, 34, 786–795.
Whitman, M.C. & Greer, C.A. (2007) Synaptic integration of adult-generated olfactory bulb granule cells: basal axodendritic centrifugal input precedes apical dendrodendritic local circuits.
Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 9951–9961.
Winner, B., Cooper-Kuhn, C.M., Aigner, R., Winkler, J. & Kuhn, H.G. (2002) Long-term survival
and cell death of newly generated neurons in the adult rat olfactory bulb. European Journal of
Neuroscience, 16, 1681–1689.
Woo, C.C. & Leon, M. (1995) Distribution and development of beta-adrenergic receptors in the
rat olfactory bulb. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 352, 1–10.
Yamaguchi, M. & Mori, K. (2005) Critical period for sensory experience-dependent survival of
newly generated granule cells in the adult mouse olfactory bulb. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the USA, 102, 9697–9702.
Zuo, Y., Yang, G., Kwon, E. & Gan, W.B. (2005) Long-term sensory deprivation prevents
­dendritic spine loss in primary somatosensory cortex. Nature, 436, 261–265.

Chapter 16

Wiring New Neurons with Old Circuits
Pierre-Marie Lledo

Abstract  The brain derives much of its function from its ability to adapt to tasks
on a wide range of time scales, from milliseconds to days, weeks, and months. This
adaptability at multiple time scales is found across all brain areas, from cognitive
areas all the way to the peripheral areas, in which sensory information is encoded so
as to facilitate the subsequent extraction of relevant information. The adaptability
of the brain is achieved through multiple morphological and physiological changes
occurring at all levels: from molecules, to spines, and to dendrites and axons. It is
clear today that brain plasticity also operates at the level of entire cells. In at least
two areas of the adult brain, new neurons are constitutively generated throughout
life and form an integral part of the networks. Because the capacity of the adult
brain to rewire itself depends on external influences, ongoing neuronal production
represents also a plastic mechanism by which brain performance can be optimized
according to the prevailing environment. However, it remains unclear when and
why brain performance has to be optimized.
This chapter focuses on the functional issues linked to neurogenesis in the olfactory system. After outlining the processes of adult neurogenesis in the olfactory
system and discussing their regulation by various factors, I consider how existing
circuits can continue to work in the face of constant arrivals and departures of cells
and explore the possible functional role of adult-born neurons in the host microcircuit. Concentrating exclusively on mammalian systems, I demonstrate throughout
this chapter that adult neurogenesis is a plastic mechanism by which brain performance can be optimized to cope with changing environment or internal state.

P.-M. Lledo (*)
Laboratory for Perception and Memory, Department of Neuroscience,
Institut Pasteur, 75015 Paris, France
and
CNRS, URA2182, 75015 Paris, France
e-mail: pmlledo@pasteur.fr

T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_16, © Springer 2011

371

372

P.-M. Lledo

16.1 Introduction
Olfaction is a vital sense for most species. Animals recognize and discriminate
between a large number of chemical signals in their environment that profoundly
influence their behavior and provide them with essential information for survival
(Eisthen 1997). Remarkably, the sense of smell has been conserved throughout
evolution, and its initial processing stage is very similar across vertebrates
(Hildebrand and Shepherd 1997; Ache and Young 2005). The first central station
of the olfactory system, the so-called olfactory bulb, is endowed with the complex
connectivity required for processing the large number of dimensions of olfactory
space, making it possible to process the information entering the olfactory system
effectively (Shepherd et al. 2004). This highly complex system has to meet a number
of challenges, including changes in the olfactory world or substantial changes in its
significance with time. Such shifts could be seasonal, or related to pregnancy and
giving birth, for instance. However, odor representation must be sufficiently stable
for higher brain regions to recognize relevant odorants even if the encoding of the
odor has changed: the smell of a rose, say, should be recognized as that of a rose,
be it spring or fall.
The continuous production of new olfactory neurons raises a series of important
questions about the possible contribution of adult neurogenesis to the functioning
of mature circuits. If adult neurogenesis is beneficial, what advantages does it confer? Are the newly generated neurons special in any way other than having been
formed late? How are these neurons integrated into existing networks? How could
they possibly contribute to brain function?
I address these questions here, using the adult olfactory bulb as a model system.
I discuss how adult neurogenesis may provide qualitatively new aspects of plasticity beyond those afforded by synaptic changes. For the sake of conciseness, this
chapter focuses on the olfactory bulb of mammals, primarily those of rodents.

16.2 Synaptic Organization of the Mammalian Olfactory Bulb
The mammalian olfactory epithelium recognizes more than a thousand airborne
volatile molecules known as odorant compounds (or odorants) (Buck and Axel
1991). This sensory organ is connected to the olfactory bulb, the first central station
for processing olfactory information (Shipley and Ennis 1996; Shepherd et  al.
2004). Odor detection begins with the binding of odorant molecules to their cognate receptors, expressed by olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) (Young et al. 2002).
Individual OSNs project in a “receptor–topic” arrangement, such that an individual
glomerulus receives sensory input from only one type of receptor (Fig. 16.1). Each
glomerular structure results from the convergence of 5 to 40,000 axon terminals,
leading to the establishment of synapses with dendrites of mitral and tufted cells
(i.e., the projection neurons of the olfactory bulb) and of various classes of local
interneurons. As each group of glomerulus-specific output neurons is odorant
receptor specific, they form a defined morphological network (Willhite et al. 2006)

16  Neurogenesis in the Adult OB

373

Fig. 16.1  Basic circuitry of the main olfactory bulb in rodent. Axons of sensory neurons in the
main olfactory epithelium project to the olfactory bulb (OB). Olfactory sensory neurons (in blue)
that express the same odorant receptor gene project their axons to either of two glomeruli in the
OB. Their axons converge on specific glomeruli, where they synapse with the dendrite of local
interneurons (periglomerular cell in brown) and short axon cell (in purple) and second-order neurons (mitral and tufted cells in green). Short axon cells contact both apical and lateral dendrites of
mitral cells. The lateral dendrites of mitral cells contact the apical dendrites of deep granule cells
whereas those from tufted cells contact superficial (sup) granule cells. Note that the second-order
neuron projections of the OB target the primary olfactory cortex, which includes the anterior
olfactory nucleus, the piriform cortex, the olfactory tubercle, the lateral part of the cortical
amygdala, and the entorhinal cortex

somewhat analogous to ocular-dominance columns in the visual cortex or barrels
in the somatosensory cortex (Shepherd et al. 2004; Shepherd 2006).
As an individual odorant may activate multiple olfactory receptors, glomerular
input maps are fragmented and highly distributed (Malnic et al. 1999). Thus, information about odorant identity is initially transmitted through a combination of the
activation of glomeruli and the relative levels of activation of different glomeruli
(Wachowiak and Shipley 2006). Once activated, glomeruli may elicit a precisely
timed action potential in a group of projection neurons. Thus, odor encoding in the
olfactory bulb results from the complex and dynamic activation of sensory afferents, which activate large numbers of glomeruli (spatial dimension) before the
processing and refining of the signal (temporal dimension) within the olfactory bulb
network (Mori et al. 2006) via intense interactions between projection neurons and
different categories of local interneurons (Wilson and Mainen 2006).
Local olfactory bulb interneurons comprise periglomerular cells, short axon
cells, and granule cells (see Fig. 16.1). Periglomerular cells form three-way synapses with mitral and tufted cell apical dendrites and with the presynaptic termini

374

P.-M. Lledo

of OSNs (Kosaka et al. 1998). They are GABAergic and/or dopaminergic and are
usually considered to mediate feedback inhibition (GABAergic and/or dopaminergic
interneurons). Type I periglomerular cells receive direct input from the OSN axons
and therefore regulate projection neuron function via both feed-back and feed-forward
circuits (Kosaka et al. 1997). In contrast, type II periglomerular cells do not receive
direct input from the OSN axons. These cells receive synaptic input only via
dendrodendritic synapses with projection neurons (Kosaka et al. 1997). Remarkably,
many types of periglomerular cells are generated throughout life, but a large proportion of these cells are type I cells. Thus, the main goal of adult periglomerular cell
neurogenesis may be to regulate the synaptic activity of primary afferents.
Short axon cells receive excitation from external tufted cells and, in turn, make
contact with other short axon cells and external tufted cells in other glomeruli
(Aungst et  al. 2003), potentially leading to the formation of an extensive lateral
network across the bulb. The cell bodies of mitral and deep and middle tufted cells
lie in deeper layers of the olfactory bulb. Mitral cells project laterally across the
bulb within the external plexiform layer, in which they interact with the dendrites
of GABAergic granule cells via reciprocal synapses. This connectivity is believed
to contribute to the establishment of different inhibitory processes within the bulb
and to stimulus-evoked oscillations.
Mitral and tufted cell basal dendrites receive synaptic contacts from granule
cells, which constitute the most numerous populations of bulbar interneurons
(Schoppa and Urban 2003), accounting for about 90% of the total bulbar interneuron population. In contrast to periglomerular cells, granule cells have no axon and
therefore make contacts exclusively through dendrites and cell bodies (Schoppa and
Urban 2003; Shepherd et al. 2007). All granule cells are GABAergic, and these cells
mediate various types of inhibition over a wide range of spatial scales (Lledo and
Lagier 2006). In short, the diversity of inhibition facilitates the spread of neuronal
activity throughout the olfactory bulb network, allowing sensory input patterns to
be shaped and projection neuron activity to be synchronized. If this dense circuit of
inhibitory interneurons is so crucial, why does it have to be continually replaced?

16.3 Sensory Processing Requires the Correct
Excitatory–Inhibitory Balance
Excitatory and inhibitory connections between glomeruli and between projection
neurons and interneurons have been proposed as mechanisms for contrast enhancement and gain control. Rodents have about 5 × 104 mitral cells and 5 × 106 granule
cells (Shepherd et al. 2004). Thus, the ratio of excitatory neurons to local interneurons in the olfactory bulb (1:100) is much higher than in other parts of the brain. For
comparison, this ratio is only about 5:1 in the neocortex. This balance between excitation and inhibition in the olfactory bulb is conserved among mammals and is
thought to play a key role in the temporal aspects of olfactory processing (Wilson and
Mainen 2006), although the key features of this temporal dimension remain unclear.

16  Neurogenesis in the Adult OB

375

Within the respiratory slow cycle, different patterns can be observed on a fine
timescale. At the end of each inhalation, a fast oscillation (~40–100 Hz, also known
as a gamma rhythm) is initiated. This odor-evoked oscillation was first described by
Adrian (1942) and has been studied in detail at both the physiological and computational levels (Cleland and Linster 2005). Most researchers agree that olfactory bulb
gamma oscillations arise from reciprocal dendrodendritic interactions between mitral
and granule cells in the external plexiform layer, in a negative feedback circuit. The
firing times of olfactory bulb mitral cells are probabilistically related to gamma oscillation at population level. Gamma oscillation is often referred to as a source of synchrony between individual projection neurons, but it represents, more precisely, the
synchrony between individual neurons and the emergent local field potential.
Activity in the gamma-frequency band has been associated with odor discrimination circuitry in many species. Walter J. Freeman was the first to demonstrate the
existence of a common gamma band waveform of the EEG over the olfactory bulb
(Freeman and Schneider 1982). The spatial amplitude patterns of this waveform are
the best indicators of an odor, and reliable patterns are produced only when meaning (positive or negative reinforcement) is associated with an odorant. Gamma band
oscillatory population synchrony is a specific mechanism associated with the discrimination of more difficult or highly overlapping odors in rodents. The disruption
of these oscillations leads to a selective decrease in the discrimination of highly
overlapping odorants (fine discrimination). The greater olfactory bulb gamma
power in GABAA receptor-knockout mice leads to a selective increase in fine odor
discrimination, with no effect on coarse discrimination. Rats devote much more
power to gamma oscillation during fine odor discrimination than during coarse
discrimination in a two-alternative choice task, consistent with enhancement of the
temporal precision of mitral cell firing patterns. Overall, the mixture of ordered but
highly complex maps of olfactory input to the olfactory bulb and oscillatory
dynamic states contribute to odor perception. The extent to which input patterns
overlap predicts odorant similarity and the difficulty of discrimination, allowing
animals to adjust their olfactory system dynamics for the interpretation of an odorant response. I now discuss the functional consequences of challenging the
interneuron population in the early stages of olfactory information processing.

16.4 Neurogenesis in the Adult Olfactory Bulb
Postdevelopmental neurogenesis has been conserved throughout evolution, from
crustaceans (Beltz and Sandeman 2003) and insects (Scotto-Lomassese et al. 2003)
to higher vertebrates, including birds (Goldman and Nottebohm 1983; ­Alvarez-Buylla
1990), rodents (Altman and Das 1965; Hinds 1968; Lois and Alvarez-Buylla 1994),
primates (Gould et al. 1999; Kornack and Rakic 1999), and humans (Eriksson et al.
1998). Despite this conservation of adult neurogenesis throughout evolution, fundamental differences in this process are observed between species. For instance, lower
vertebrates can regenerate entire regions of the brain whereas other animals cannot.

376

P.-M. Lledo

It seems indeed that the extent of adult neurogenesis decreases with increasing
brain complexity (Kempermann 2006). In mammals, adult neurogenesis under
normal conditions is confined to the subgranular zone of the hippocampal dentate
gyrus and the subventricular zone (SVZ), which contributes interneurons to the
olfactory bulb (Rakic 2002; Alvarez-Buylla and Garcia-Verdugo 2002). There is
some evidence to suggest that constitutive neurogenesis occurs in other regions of
the adult brain, but methodological issues (e.g., Kornack and Rakic 2001; Koketsu
et al. 2003; Frielingsdorf et al. 2004) make it impossible to add these regions to
the list of zones in which adult neurogenesis is known to occur, at least for the
time being.

16.4.1 Producing New Neurons
The astrocytes lining the border between the striatum and the lateral ventricle act as
slowly dividing neural stem cells, generating a progeny of neuroblast precursors
(Doetsch et al. 1999; Laywell et al. 2000). Once generated in the germinal niche
(see the glossary in Box 16.1), these neuroblasts proceed toward the olfactory bulb
along an intricate pathway called the rostral migratory stream (RMS), which may be
as much as 5 mm long in rats. More than 30,000 neuroblasts leave the rodent SVZ
for the RMS each day (Alvarez-Buylla et al. 2001). Rather than being guided by
radial glia, as in the developing brain, adult-born neuroblasts migrate tangentially in
chains through tubular structures formed by specialized astrocytes. Time-lapse
video imaging can be used to analyze this migration directly and has shown that
nuclear translocation always occurs in the direction of the leading process extension,
often leaving a thin trailing process behind the cell body. Remarkably, cells move in
both directions, with occasional migration back toward the SVZ observed. Several
studies have reported migration to be rapid in explants (100  mm/h) and ex vivo
(50 mm/h). However, it remains unclear how neuroblasts migrate in vivo, as it is not
currently possible to monitor migration appropriately from the adult neurogenic
zone, through the migratory pathway, or at the integration site. These areas are too
deep for conventional fluorescence microscopy. A method based on integrated fiber
confocal fluorescence microscopy has therefore been developed, facilitating minimally invasive, long-term recording several millimeters into anesthetized animals.
This novel technique has made it possible, for the first time, to visualize migrating
newly formed neurons in living animals (Davenne et al. 2005). A large number of
SVZ progenitor cells are labeled, and the migration of neuroblasts can then be traced
over several hours. The speed of migration in  vivo is not constant. Instead, there
seem to be spurts of migration interspersed with periods of inactivity.
After reaching the olfactory bulb and detaching from the chains, the new cells
migrate radially, giving rise to two main types of neuron, granule cells and periglomerular cells, located in different layers (see Fig. 16.1). The two cell types make
only local contacts in the bulb, directly or indirectly modulating the processing of
sensory information by the projection neurons.

16  Neurogenesis in the Adult OB

377

Box 16.1  Neurogenic Stem Cell Niches of the Adult Mammalian Brain
Neural Stem/Precursor Cells.  Adult central nervous system (CNS) stem
cells have several cardinal features, including an unlimited capacity for selfrenewal, the ability to proliferate indefinitely in presence of mitogens, and
multipotency for the various neuroectodermal lineages of the CNS. The multipotent progenitors of the adult brain are proliferative cells with a limited
capacity for self-renewal that can differentiate into at least two different cell
lineages. In contrast, lineage-specific precursors (or progenitors) are cells
restricted to only one particularly lineage: neuronal, astroglial, or oligodendroglial. CNS stem cells and all types of precursor/progenitor may be considered, in general terms, to be neural precursor cells (NPCs).
The Germinal Niche.  NPC self-renewal and differentiation are regulated by
a specialized microenvironment, conventionally referred to as the germinal
niche, in which these cells reside. Both environmental cues and intrinsic
genetic programs are required to maintain stem cell properties and to direct,
or regulate, stem cell proliferation and differentiation within niches (Doetsch
2003).
Niche Cytoarchitecture.  The subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral
v­ entricle wall and the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus are germinal regions of the brain in which neural stem cells reside
and support neurogenesis and gliogenesis throughout adult life. Cells with the
structural and molecular characteristics of astrocytes are responsible for neurogenesis (true stem cells or type B cells) in the SVZ and SGZ (Doetsch et al.
1999; Laywell et al. 2000; Garcia et al. 2004). The SVZ astrocytes, which
produce glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), are in intimate contact with all
other SVZ cell types, including the rapidly dividing transit-amplifying
(type C) cells and the lineage-committed (postmitotic) migratory neuroblasts
(type A cells). The differentiation of the cell lineage passes from type B
through type C to type A cells, with type B cells believed to be the selfrenewing primary precursors (Doetsch et  al. 1999). In the SGZ, GFAPexpressing astrocytes function as stem (type B) cells, undergoing self-renewal,
proliferation, and differentiation into transit-amplifying (type D) cells, which
then differentiate into lineage-committed migratory granule neurons (type G
cells) (Seri et al. 2001). The maintenance and differentiation of neural stem
cells in brain neurogenic areas depend on these cells being in physical contact
with the basal lamina, which acts as a scaffold and sequesters and/or modulates cytokines and growth factors derived from local cells (such as fibroblasts, macrophages, and pericytes). Type B cells in the SVZ are in close
contact (interdigitated) with both the basal lamina and the blood vessels. In
the SGZ, bursts of endothelial cell division are spatially and temporally
related to clusters of neurogenesis.

378

P.-M. Lledo

16.4.2 Integrating Newly Generated Interneurons
By transducing newly generated cells in the adult SVZ with replication-­incompetent
retroviruses, resulting in the green fluorescent protein (GFP) labeling of these cells
(Box 16.2), researchers have been able to characterize the morphological and electrophysiological properties of newly generated neurons during their migration and
differentiation (Petreanu and Alvarez-Buylla 2002; Belluzzi et al. 2003; Carleton
et  al. 2003; Whitman and Greer 2007). The morphological complexity of the
newly generated cells increases within a few weeks of their generation. Granule
cells form more elaborate dendrites, extending into the external plexiform layer of
the bulb and becoming fully morphologically mature within 2 weeks of their
­generation (Petreanu and Alvarez-Buylla 2002; Whitman and Greer 2007). By
contrast, periglomerular cells take about 4 weeks to develop their full dendritic and
axonal morphology (Belluzzi et  al. 2003). During this maturation period, the
immature bulbar interneurons express transient marker proteins, including TUJ1
and TUC4 (Winner et al. 2002).
The sequential formation of GABAergic and glutamatergic synapses is crucial
for the construction of stereotypic neural networks during brain development.
Studies of neurogenesis in the adult olfactory bulb have revealed major differences
in glutamatergic synaptogenesis between newly generated periglomerular cells
and granule cells. As periglomerular cells mature, the ratio of 2-amino-3-(5methyl-3-oxo-1,2-oxazol-4-yl) propanoic acid to N-methyl-d-aspartic acid (the
AMPA:NMDA ratio) at OSN synapses increases, and the contribution of NR2B
subunit-containing receptors to NMDA responses (a hallmark of juvenile NMDA
synapses) decreases (Grubb et al. 2008). Surprisingly, however, these postsynaptic
transformations are not mirrored by presynaptic changes. Once a periglomerular
cell receives inputs from the OSN, the presynaptic function at the first olfactory
connection remains remarkably constant. This finding suggests that newly generated periglomerular cells preferentially make initial contacts with preexisting
functioning boutons (i.e., either already involved in a synapse or formed before the
postsynaptic site).
As for periglomerular cells, the GABAergic and glutamatergic synapses
­involving new granule cells are established sequentially, with the GABAergic
­synapses established first. However, by contrast to the sequential acquisition of
synapses in newly generated periglomerular cells, NMDA-mediated synaptic
events occur in new interneurons that are not yet excitable but which have started
to receive g-aminobutyric acid A (GABAA) and AMPA inputs (Carleton et  al.
2003). In ­periglomerular cells, the maturation of voltage-dependent sodium current
and, consequently, the capacity of the newly generated cells to fire action potentials
precedes the formation of synaptic contacts (Belluzzi et  al. 2003; Grubb et  al.
2008). It remains unclear why the constraints on the granule cell network integration should differ so greatly from those in periglomerular cells. However, it should
be borne in mind that new periglomerular cells integrate into microcircuits

16  Neurogenesis in the Adult OB

379

c­ haracterized by the ongoing replacement of primary afferents whereas new
­granule cells receive synaptic inputs from the dendrites of projection neurons
known to be stable over extended periods of time (Mizrahi and Katz 2003). The
rules governing the ­incorporation of adult-generated olfactory bulb interneurons
thus differ according to the neuronal subtype (granule cells are axon-less interneurons whereas periglomerular cells have axons), and neuronal microcircuit as well.
Whatever the mechanism involved, this difference indicates that the functional
integration of adult-born neurons follows a cell type-specific, rather than stereotyped, pattern. The delayed maturation of granule cell excitability may help to
prevent disruption of the existing circuitry during integration of the new cells.
Further studies are required to determine whether the newly generated neurons
form functional synapses with their downstream target neurons and release appropriate neurotransmitters, providing an unequivocal demonstration of the integration
of these cells into adult networks.
Maturing neurons integrate into circuits by forming functional synapses. In the
adult olfactory bulb, synapses in maturing cells have been identified by staining for
presynaptic markers (Belluzzi et al. 2003; Magavi et al. 2005) or electron microscopy (Whitman and Greer 2007). This approach has highlighted the precocious
formation of synapses between the basal compartments of newly generated granule
cells and centrifugal and mitral cell axon collaterals (Whitman and Greer 2007).
Such early connections may be crucial for the differentiation and stabilization of
adult-generated olfactory bulb interneurons.
Dendritic spine density changes over time in adult-born granule cells: it increases
rapidly from 14 to 28 days after generation of the cell, remains steady until 42 days,
and then decreases after 56 days (Whitman and Greer 2007). This decrease in spine
density may result from pruning in cells with synaptic ­connections lasting more
than 42 days, or the preferential death of cells with a high spine ­density, resulting
in a population with an overall lower density of spines. Periglomerular cell spines
mature more slowly than those of granule cells. Periglomerular cells have elaborate
dendritic arbors at day 14, but immature filopodium-like processes do not appear
until day 28, with mature pedunculate spines absent until day 42 (Whitman and
Greer 2007). Spine density depends not only on cell age, but also on the degree of
neuronal activity in the host circuit. Dendritic spine density decreases to 50% control levels when a new granule cell reaches a silenced olfactory bulb network,
whereas it is unaffected in preexisting granule cells (Saghatelyan et al. 2005). This
activity-dependent regulation is consistent with the selective stabilization theory,
according to which an initial phase of proliferation, involving the production of
large numbers of new neurons, is followed by massive cell elimination through
apoptosis (Oppenheim 1991). Based on this model, synapse pruning should help to
stabilize a particular set of microcircuits, favoring the survival of this set of contacts
over the many others, and thereby sculpting the precise network required for a
given brain function (Changeux and Danchin 1976).

380

P.-M. Lledo

 ox 16.2  Viral Tools for Labeling Subsets of Cells Generated in Adults
B
Studies of the processes of maturation, migration, and integration of newly
generated neurons in the adult brain can be simplified by the reliable labeling
and visualization of particular types of cell. In recent years, the use of viral
vectors encoding green fluorescent protein (GFP) has revolutionized the
investigation of adult neurogenesis. In contrast to many of the methods commonly used for fluorescent cell labeling (e.g., the use of lipophilic carbocyanin vital dyes such as DiI or DiO), the GFP label remains within the cell and
its progeny so long as the transgene encoding GFP remains present and there
are appropriate transcriptional elements to transgene expression. Thus, internalization, cell division, and cell growth do not decrease GFP fluorescence,
whereas they would decrease the intensity of chemical dyes. In addition, GFP
is a large protein that is not transferred from cell to cell, a critical property for
the unequivocal tracing of cell lineages.
However, for imaging cells in intact tissues, GFP should ideally be produced in a large subset of cells, but not in every cell. Many viral vectors are
now available for gene transfer into neuronal cells (see, for instance,
Washbourne and McAllister 2002), offering a wide range of options in terms
of infection specificity and efficiency and the delivery and regulation of particular transgenes (Davidson and Breakefield 2003).
Many viral vectors, based on pseudorabies, herpesvirus, adenovirus, and
retrovirus backbones, have been used to introduce reporter genes, such as
GFP into cells in culture or within intact animals. For example, Carlén et al.
(2002) used a pseudorabies virus producing GFP to cross the synapse between
connected neurons. They injected this virus into the piriform cortex of adult
mice exposed to bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) in drinking water. BrdU and
viral colabeling of the periglomerular and granule cells showed that new neurons reached the olfactory bulb. Furthermore, the triple labeling of newly
generated neurons showed that some BrdU–NeuN colabeled cells were also
positive for c-Fos induction in adult mice exposed to odorants. Such results
clearly demonstrate that adult-born olfactory neurons are functionally integrated into the adult circuitry.
Differing from other viral systems, which preferentially infect quiescent cells,
Moloney murine leukemia virus (MoMuLV)-derived recombinant ­retroviral
­vectors selectively infect dividing cells, integrating permanently into their genome,
making it possible to visualize neuronal development from early ­progenitor cell
stages. In this case, cycling neuroblasts can be labeled and their progeny ­followed
for extended periods of time by injecting ­Moloney-based retroviral ­vectors
­encoding GFP into the adult SVZ. These vectors have made it possible to study
the successive steps by which a neuroblast undergoes morphological ­maturation
to become a mature neuron (Petreanu and ­Alvarez-Buylla 2002). Following on
from this work, the consecutive electrophysiological stages through which the
(continued)

16  Neurogenesis in the Adult OB

381

Box 16.2  (continued)
neuroblast passes before becoming a fully mature neuron have been described,
using similar GFP-encoding retroviral vectors. The proportion of different
cell types generated from transduced SVZ cells differs from that generated by
transduced RMS cells (Hack et al. 2005). The construction of Moloney-based
retroviral ­vectors carrying instructive genes (Hack et al. 2005; Kohwi et al.
2005; Marshall et al. 2005) makes it possible to alter the phenotypic fate of
progenitor cells both predictably and efficiently, an intervention with potentially important clinical applications. As recombinant retroviral vectors target
only those cells involved in postnatal neurogenesis, retroviral transduction could
provide specific cell types for reconstruction of the brain after brain injury.
As for the Moloney-based retroviral vector approach, oncoretroviral vectors have been injected into the SVZ to transduce dividing cells (Falk et al.
2002; Rogelius et al. 2005), but not neural stem cells, which are moderately
quiescent (Morshead et al. 1994). Both types of retroviral vector transduce
only rapidly dividing precursors and neuroblasts, the so-called A- and C-type
cells (Garcia-Verdugo et al. 1998). In contrast, lentiviral vectors, which transduce both dividing and nondividing cells, preferentially transduce neural stem
cells (B-type cells) when injected into the SVZ because of the higher density
of these cells in this forebrain region (Rogelius et al. 2005).
As MoMuLV-derived vectors cannot deliver genes to nondividing cells,
these retroviral particles have limited applications in the adult CNS. Lentiviruses
are currently the most promising retroviruses for in vivo applications as they
are of low toxicity and can provide long-term reporter gene expression.
Lentiviruses containing specific promoters have been used in vivo for the specific labeling of neurons or glial cells (Jakobsson et al. 2003), and lentiviral
systems have also been developed for RNAi (Rubinson et al. 2003; Tiscornia
et al. 2003). Lentiviruses can also infect a wide range of species, and the lentiviral infection of embryos results in germline transmission of the integrated
virus, providing a method for the stable expression of reporter genes in species
other than mice (Lois et al. 2002; Rubinson et al. 2003; Tiscornia et al. 2003).
These developments suggest that lentiviruses may be routinely used both to
label neurons and to silence genes in vivo.
Thus, the use of viral vectors to deliver genes to the nervous system is very
promising, both for basic research and for therapeutic applications. Several
landmark applications of in  vivo neuronal labeling have been reported in
recent years. However, the continual development of new labeling strategies
and advances in imaging techniques suggest that this is just the beginning.
In the near future, the genetic manipulation of sparsely labeled neurons should
become possible. In addition, improved GFP-based reporters for neuronal
physiology studies are likely to find a greater number of applications in vivo.
It may even become possible to use viral vectors for RNAi-based genetic
screens for neuronal function in species in which traditional forward genetics
has not previously proved feasible.

382

P.-M. Lledo

16.5 Adult Neurogenesis: A Neural Basis
for Experience-Induced Plasticity
Bulbar interneurons generated in adults may play an important role in olfactory
learning and memory, possibly by connecting new combinations of projection neurons that increase in relevance during the life of the animal (Lledo et al. 2005). This
feature may result from the unique properties of the newcomers, which are endowed
with juvenile functions. During the development of the neuronal circuitry, environment-induced activity shapes the establishment of appropriate patterns in the neuronal circuitry. This experience-induced activity is particularly influential during a
sensitive period of development – the critical period – during which maturation of
the GABAergic network is thought to be one of the key factors contributing to
functional remodeling (Hensch 2005). Thus, in contrast to other sensory systems,
the olfactory bulb interneurons display constant neurogenesis, raising the possibility of an endless critical period for olfaction.
A previous study on the functional response of olfactory granule neurons generated in adult animals showed that, unlike preexisting neurons, newly generated
granule cells preferentially respond to new odors after their synaptic integration,
consistent with the view that these neurons have unique properties and make a
specific contribution to the olfactory circuitry (Magavi et  al. 2005). The greater
sensitivity of adult-born cells to new odors seems to emerge after a period of familiarization with these odors, indicating that the greater responsiveness of the newly
formed neurons is both stimulus specific and experience dependent. Thus, the bulbar interneurons generated in adult animals seem to have unusual properties that
make a unique contribution to the olfactory system. It has been suggested that bulbar,
and particularly, granule cells neurogenesis in adults is involved in learning and
memory, but this phenomenon should also be considered in other contexts. In addition to contributing to endogenous repair, adult-born interneurons may be involved
in inducing, facilitating, or maintaining olfactory-mediated behavior, such as food
selection, mate selection, or caring for young (Shingo et al. 2003). Studies of the
potential role of newly formed neurons in these processes may provide insight into
the functional significance of adult neurogenesis.
Active neurogenesis clearly occurs in the adult olfactory bulb, but only a small
percentage of the newly formed neurons survive. These surviving interneurons
integrate into bulbar circuits, whereas the others are destroyed. Quantitative studies
have demonstrated that almost half of all newly generated interneurons are eliminated 1–2 months after their creation (Petreanu and Alvarez-Buylla 2002; Winner
et al. 2002). The other 50%, which survive this initial period of cell elimination,
generally survive for at least another 19 months (Winner et al. 2002). Consistent
with these findings, a previous study based on nostril occlusion at various time
points suggested that the survival of newly generated olfactory bulb granule cells
was affected by sensory experience, but only when the cells concerned were
between 14 and 28 days old (Yamaguchi and Mori 2005). It would therefore be
of interest to determine the regulatory mechanisms controlling the survival of

16  Neurogenesis in the Adult OB

383

newly generated neurons. Several studies have suggested that long-lasting,
­odorant-dependent activity in the olfactory bulb may control the survival of the new
neurons and improve olfactory learning (Petreanu and Alvarez-Buylla 2002;
Rochefort et al. 2002; Mandairon et al. 2003). Mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinase activation may contribute to the odorant-induced increase in the survival of
adult-born bulbar interneurons (Miwa and Storm 2005).

16.6 Contribution of Adult-Born Neurons to Sensory
Information Processing
A myriad of factors regulate the production, migration, and development of newly
generated neurons in adults and determine whether these neurons die or survive.
However, once a newly generated cell has reached its target, matured into a neuron,
and survived, what does it do then? Why is it there? What is its function? How long
does it survive?

16.6.1 A Role in Sensory Information Processing
In theory, the new neurons may contribute to adult brain functions through actions
at the cellular, network, and systems levels. At the cellular level, the function of
these new cells is quite obvious: they are just neurons. However, they may be
restricted to a subcategory of preexisting interneurons [in the olfactory bulb,
hydroxylase-expressing (TH), calbindin (CalB)-, calretinin (CalR)-, and parvalbumin (ParV)-positive cells]. The newcomers may also differ from the preexisting
neurons in terms of target identity. Previous studies of the maturation of newly
generated cells have suggested that their cellular function may differ from that of
the existing cells, at least transiently. Generally, the newly generated neurons are
likely to be more excitable and more adaptable than the older, established neurons.
In many ways, they act as do the neurons of the embryonic brain, readily making
new synapses with other neurons and changing the strength of these connections
following their integration into mature circuits. Young granule cells in the adult
olfactory bulb, for example, display much greater synaptic plasticity than older
granule cells (Nissant et al. 2009). In addition, newly generated granule and periglomerular cells have active membrane properties markedly different from those of
the established neurons surrounding them (Carleton et  al. 2003; Belluzzi et  al.
2003), and display greater plasticity in response to sensory deprivation (Saghatelyan
et al. 2005).
There is now clear evidence that olfactory interneurons produced postnatally in
the olfactory bulb are physiologically integrated (Carlén et al. 2002; Belluzzi et al.
2003; Carleton et al. 2003). However, the functional significance of the newly generated interneurons in the olfactory bulb remains unclear. Nevertheless, growing

384

P.-M. Lledo

interest in adult neurogenesis has led to advances in our understanding of the
molecular, cellular, and physiological properties and location of newly generated
neurons. Evidence is accumulating that newborn neurons have properties lacked by
their established counterparts. These unique properties provide a fundamental
framework for elucidating the functional role of the neurons generated in adult
animals. Newly generated neurons in the olfactory bulb have different characteristics at early and late postnatal stages, suggesting that postnatal neurogenesis does
not give rise to a uniform population of bulbar interneurons. The newly generated
interneurons are positioned deeper in the granule cell layer in late postnatal than in
early postnatal periods (Lemasson et al. 2005). As no difference in apoptosis across
the granule cell layer is observed between stages, this gradient may reflect differences in the recruitment of newly generated interneurons, which suggests that the
cells generated in the early postnatal period and in adulthood respond differently to
common signals or respond to different molecules during the life of the animal. The
neurons generated later in the postnatal period also migrate to the olfactory bulb
more rapidly than those generated early in the postnatal period (Lemasson et  al.
2005). The glial tube surrounding the migrating neuroblasts is difficult to detect
before the third week of postnatal development (Peretto et  al. 1997, 1999). The
observed difference in migration speed may therefore be the result of molecules
being released from the glial processes of astrocytes along the RMS of the adult,
facilitating neuroblast migration. The newly generated interneurons of the mature
olfactory bulb also differ from those established during the development of the
olfactory bulb in having a much lower survival rate. It has been suggested that
interneurons generated early in life, with a high rate of survival, play a critical role
in determining the control of precocious olfactory processes over lifelong behavior
(Lemasson et al. 2005), whereas interneurons generated during adulthood, which
have a much lower rate of survival, fine tune olfaction (Gheusi et  al. 2000;
Rochefort et  al. 2002; Enwere et  al. 2004). Investigations of the causes of these
differences in the survival potential of neurons produced at different ages would
help to broaden our understanding of these functions.
At the network level, the newly generated neurons may contribute to the properties driving the concerted activity of groups of cells. In the olfactory bulb, the oscillations and synchrony of neuronal activity are major network phenomena serving
as potential targets for adult neurogenesis. Indeed, the olfactory bulb receives and
processes signals from OSNs and transmits them to higher processing centers. The
mapping of sensory inputs has revealed that each odorant generates a reproducible
spatial pattern of restricted activation in the glomerular layer of the olfactory bulb.
However, within the bulb, these confined patterns are transformed into widely distributed patterns by lateral interactions between relay neurons and local interneurons. Thus, odor information processing requires the spatial patterning of both
sensory inputs and synaptic interactions mediated by local interneurons. Odor representation is thus highly dynamic and temporally orchestrated by local interneurons (Lledo and Lagier 2006). Adult neurogenesis may lead to persistent or
transient enhancement of the lateral inhibition mediated by GABAergic ­interneurons
of the olfactory bulb network, facilitating odorant discrimination and ­increasing the

16  Neurogenesis in the Adult OB

385

chances of survival of newly generated interneurons. The continuous recruitment of
local interneurons throughout life is therefore a key means of ­continually adapting
transposition from the spatial to the temporal dimension, to optimize olfactory
information processing.
Finally, in terms of functional plasticity, neurogenesis at the network level
should be considered as a potential permissive or instructive mechanism. It is still
unknown whether the new cells have predetermined functions, enabling them to
instruct further changes in the networks they join, or whether they simply facilitate
changes to occur in these circuits. The perceptual and mnemonic functions of the
olfactory bulb have understandably led to investigations of the importance of adult
neurogenesis in these processes. The gap between cell generation and cognitive
processes is large, but we are beginning to understand how the plasticity afforded
by adult neurogenesis might contribute to shaping the behavioral responses of the
animal (Lledo and Gheusi 2003).

16.6.2 Functional Diversity of Newly Generated Interneurons
Clear functional roles have yet to be defined for cells expressing TH, CalR, CalB,
or ParV. Adult neurogenesis leads to the continuous renewal of CB+, CR+ and TH+
interneurons throughout life (Young et al. 2007; Merkle et al. 2007; Kohwi et al.
2007). These cell types differ not only in their neurochemistry, marker gene expression, and location in the olfactory bulb but also in their structural features and
synaptic properties (Kosaka et  al. 1998; Shipley and Ennis 1996; Kosaka and
Kosaka 2005; Parrish-Aungst et  al. 2007; Pressler and Strowbridge 2006). For
example, it has been suggested that the different subtypes of periglomerular cells
have specific functions (Kosaka et al. 1998).
Further studies will probably link these functional features with neurochemical
markers, providing further evidence of periglomerular cell heterogeneity (Whitman
and Greer 2007). However, it is noteworthy that the use of immunohistological
markers to define cell types may be somewhat misleading, as these indicators may
be transiently expressed at different levels during cell maturation, or in response to
environmental stimuli. For example, glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), GABA,
and CalR are present in neuroblasts from birth onward (Stewart et al. 2002) and are
not affected by olfactory bulb odor deprivation (Stone et al. 1991). By contrast, TH
immunoreactivity is not detectable before 10 days, peaks at 3 months (Winner et al.
2002; Baker et al. 1983), and is dramatically downregulated by odor deprivation
(Philpot et al. 1997). Thus, the expression of neurochemical markers may, in some
cases, be correlated with anatomical or physiological features of cell subtypes and
may therefore be good markers of cell fate. In other cases, the expression of these
markers may simply indicate the presence of transient neuronal features.
What are the functional implications of periglomerular cell integration for the first
synapse in olfaction? We reported significant maturation in the postsynaptic features
of olfactory nerve inputs to newly generated periglomerular cells (Grubb et al. 2008);

386

P.-M. Lledo

this indicates that immature connections between the nose and brain are different
from their mature counterparts. Thus, in early postnatal development, despite the
requirement for olfaction from birth for survival, which implies that the first synapse
in olfaction is functional from birth, olfaction – and its first synapse in particular –
needs not necessarily be fully mature from birth. Indeed, our data provide functional
correlates for the considerable anatomical plasticity occurring postnatally in the primary olfactory projection (Zou et al. 2004). As in the granule cell layer of the olfactory bulb or the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, newly generated periglomerular
cells receive inputs functionally different from those of their resident neighbors,
albeit transiently. Thus, for limited time periods, newly generated periglomerular
cells in the adult brain can provide a functionally different connection for sensory
information arriving from the periphery. However, as this different function is limited
to the postsynaptic half of the synapse, presynaptic olfactory nerve terminals seem to
be appropriate for the reliable signaling of olfactory information from the nose to the
brain in the face of remarkable anatomical plasticity in terms of connections.
Granule cells constitute the largest interneuron subpopulation in the olfactory
bulb, accounting for 90% of the total population of bulbar interneurons. In contrast
to periglomerular cells, granule cells have no axon, and therefore make contacts
exclusively through their dendrites and cell bodies (Shepherd et al. 2007). They are
GABAergic interneurons mediating several types of inhibition over a wide range of
spatial scales (Lledo and Lagier 2006) (see Box 2). Newly generated granule cells
may be important for olfactory learning and memory, possibly through the formation of new combinations of projection neurons of increasing relevance during the
life and experience of the subject (Lledo et al. 2005).
Adult olfactory bulb neurogenesis is affected by diverse neurological disorders
and environmental stimuli, suggesting that newly generated neuronal cells may
respond to these processes. The number of new granule cells in the olfactory bulb
was shown to increase during olfactory learning (Alonso et al. 2006). Surprisingly,
a simple exposure to olfactory cues did not affect the number of newborn granule
cells; only odorants presented in a learning context could enhance the survival of a
specific subset of granule cells (Alonso et al. 2006). These results imply that association learning may locally control the survival of newborn granule cells, thus
potentially affecting the function of a given microcircuit while sparing the rest of
the olfactory bulb network. Further studies are required to determine whether this
heterogeneity in cell survival reflects interneuron diversity.

16.7 Concluding Remarks
We still do not know why new neurons are incorporated into some parts of the adult
brain and not into others, but research into the regulation of adult neurogenesis, and
an increasing number of studies investigating the potential function of the new
cells, have provided two major pieces of information. First, adult neurogenesis is
affected by relevant behavior, including behavior specifically related to olfactory

16  Neurogenesis in the Adult OB

387

bulb functions. Second, changes in the rate or extent of neurogenesis have in turn
an effect on subsequent behavior. Thus, experience may change the entire structure
of adult circuits, and changes in structure may modify or affect subsequent behavioral responses.
The correlation between neuronal activity and adult neurogenesis in the olfactory system suggests that new neurons are involved in general aspects of bulbar
function, probably sustaining the ability of the adult network to adapt information
processing to relevant ethological needs. Several studies have demonstrated that
odor representation at the first central relay is dynamic and highly complex and
may therefore require unique plasticity mechanisms. Neuronal production, migration, and the replacement of interneurons in the olfactory bulb are probably
involved in this adaptive mechanism. However, the precise nature of the function
required for adaptation remains unknown, which may be because we still know
little about the chemical ecology of animals that rely heavily on olfaction. We still
have very little idea of what constitutes a natural olfactory “scene” for a rodent. The
bulbar interneurons are known to play a crucial role in transposing the spatial
dimension of olfactory information into a temporal dimension. They also distribute
this information throughout the entire bulbar circuit. However, we do not yet know
whether the newcomers can accomplish both these tasks. The contribution of adultborn granule cells to the activity of preexisting networks may be different from that
of established cells, at least during the early stages of their maturation.
Furthermore, adult neurogenesis does not simply introduce fresh cells into old
circuits. Some selection also occurs as about half the new interneurons die within a
month of maturation. It has been shown that the newly formed granule cells maintain synaptic contacts during this period of rapid cell death. The selective elimination of neurons may make it possible to sculpt the circuitry rapidly. As a result,
most of the newly generated neurons never mature fully and may therefore never
play a role similar to that of the preexisting neurons. An ability to mold the integration of new neurons and to eliminate other neurons continually, without depleting
the neuronal population, may provide neuronal networks with an adaptive potential
unequaled by synaptic plasticity alone and a substrate for learning.

16.7.1 Two Seemingly Contradictory Tasks: Ensuring
Stability and Flexibility
The adult brain must guide the organism through an ever-changing world. In this
context, it faces two conflicting challenges: maintaining behavioral responses and
long-term traces, which requires preservation of the necessary synaptic ­organization
of a given circuitry, and maintaining a capacity to adapt following brain injury, in
learning conditions, or when faced with environmental changes. At first glance,
neurogenesis in the adult brain would seem to bias the system in favor of flexibility. The introduction of a completely new cell into a functioning circuit or the
removal of an existing neuron from the existing network is, after all, a major step.

388

P.-M. Lledo

However, computational models have suggested that adult neurogenesis, rather
than ­increasing the flexibility of the network, may serve to stabilize an already
plastic network confronted with a large volume of new information.
The discovery of adult neurogenesis has led to efforts to understand the relationship between the presence of new cells and learning in various model systems.
However, conflicting results have been obtained. For instance, Gould et al. (1999)
reported an increase in the survival rates of newly formed hippocampal neurons in
rats subjected to spatial learning tests in the Morris water maze. By contrast, van
Praag et al. (1999) observed no change in neurogenesis following water-maze training in mice. Other studies have confirmed the complex nature of adult neurogenesis, as both decreases and increases in neurogenesis have been reported with
water-maze learning (Ambrogini et  al. 2004; Ehninger and Kempermann 2006).
These discrepancies may result from changes in the functions of newly formed
neurons during their maturation. They may also reflect the temporal relationship
between the labeling of newly formed neurons and exposure to the memory task
(Döbrössy et al. 2003; Dupret et al. 2007). Many more new neurons than are actually needed may be produced, requiring the active and selective removal of those
that have not established appropriate synaptic contacts. The learning-induced
mechanisms involved are probably similar to those mediating brain development
and maturation, shaping relevant and functional neural networks in the developing
brain. There may be a balance between the addition and elimination of newly
formed neurons during learning. According to this view, learning depends not only
on the addition of new neurons and new synaptic connections, but also on regressive events culminating in the removal of neurons from the cellular network of the
adult central nervous system.

16.7.2 Challenges for the Future
Improvements in our understanding of the role of adult neurogenesis in brain plasticity do not depend solely on the collection of larger amounts of higher-quality
data concerning the dynamics, spatial extent, and longevity of experience-dependent
structural changes in adult circuits. They also depend on (1) an extensive precise
description of the integrative properties of individual adult-born neurons; (2) the
design of better models taking into account the redundancies of neuronal network
connections together with their sparse coding; and (3) a more complete description
of the guidance and selection mechanisms acting on new neurons. Identification of
the physical changes encoding particular elements of long-term information
remains a central issue in neuroscience. Interdisciplinary approaches combining
molecular, anatomical, physiological, and theoretical methods are likely to be
required to address this and other questions relating to the physical substrate for
long-term adaptation in the adult brain circuits.
Those like us who are trying to decipher the functional meaning of adult
­neurogenesis may find some clues by taking into account its extremely limited

16  Neurogenesis in the Adult OB

389

regional distribution. What is so special about the olfactory bulb and the ­hippocampus
that these two adult regions are the only structures into which new neurons are
­continuously plugged? The answer to this question might be found when taking into
account the specific task these networks have to fulfill. The olfactory bulb and hippocampal circuits are vital in the segmentation of olfactory and spatial information,
respectively. Indeed, these circuits are both involved in decorrelating complex overlapping afferent inputs. It has also been suggested that both the olfactory bulb and
hippocampus handle particularly large amounts of information (Chambers et  al.
2004) or employ particular coding strategies to manage that information (Cecchi
et al. 2001). However, for every similarity between the olfactory bulb and the hippocampus, large differences can be found between the two structures, not least in
adult neurogenesis. More detailed investigations of the function of adult neurogenesis are required to determine whether this process plays a similar, specific role in
the adult olfactory bulb and hippocampus.
Acknowledgments  I apologize to those authors whose references, although relevant to this subject, have not been included in this review for reasons of space constraints. My laboratory is supported by the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale (Équipe FRM), by the life insurance
company “AG2R-La-Mondiale,” and by Ecole des Neurosciences de Paris (ENP).

References
Ache BW and Young JM (2005) Olfaction: diverse species, conserved principles. Neuron
48:417–430.
Adrian ED (1942) Olfactory reactions in the brain of the hedgehog. J Physiol 100:459–473.
Alonso M, Viollet C, Gabellec MM et al. (2006) Olfactory discrimination learning increases the
survival of adult-born neurons in the olfactory bulb. J Neurosci 26:10508–10513.
Altman J and Das GD (1965) Post-natal origin of microneurones in the rat brain. Nature
207:953–956.
Alvarez-Buylla A (1990) Mechanism of neurogenesis in adult avian brain. Experientia 46:948–955.
Alvarez-Buylla A and Garcia-Verdugo JM (2002) Neurogenesis in adult subventricular zone.
J Neurosci 22:629–634.
Alvarez-Buylla A, Garcia-Verdugo JM and Tramontin AD (2001) A unified hypothesis on the
lineage of neural stem cells. Nat Rev Neurosci 2:287–293.
Ambrogini P, Orsini L, Mancini C et al. (2004) Learning may reduce neurogenesis in adult rat
dentate gyrus. Neurosci Lett 359:13–16.
Aungst JL, Heyward PM, Puche AC et al. (2003) Centre-surround inhibition among olfactory bulb
glomeruli. Nature 426:623–629.
Baker H, Kawano T, Margolis FL et al. (1983) Transneuronal regulation of tyrosine hydroxylase
expression in olfactory bulb of mouse and rat. J Neurosci 3:69–78.
Belluzzi O, Benedusi M, Ackman J et al. (2003) Electrophysiological differentiation of new neurons in the olfactory bulb. J Neurosci 23:10411–10418.
Beltz BS and Sandeman DC (2003) Regulation of life-long neurogenesis in the decapod brain.
Arthropod Struct Dev 32:39–60.
Buck L, Axel R (1991) A novel multigene family may encode odorant receptors: a molecular basis
for odor recognition. Cell 65:175–187.
Carlén M, Cassidy RM, Brismar H et al. (2002) Functional integration of adult-born neurons. Curr
Biol 12:606–608.

390

P.-M. Lledo

Carleton A, Petreanu LT, Lansford R et al. (2003) Becoming a new neuron in the adult olfactory
bulb. Nat Neurosci 6:507–518.
Cecchi GA, Petreanu LT, Alvarez-Buylla A et al. (2001) Unsupervised learning and adaptation in
a model of adult neurogenesis. J Comput Neurosci 11:175–182.
Chambers RA, Potenza MN, Hoffman RE et al. (2004) Simulated apoptosis/neurogenesis regulates learning and memory capabilities of adaptive neural networks. Neuropsychopharmacology
29:747–758.
Changeux JP and Danchin A (1976) Selective stabilisation of developing synapses as a mechanism for the specification of neuronal networks. Nature 264:705–712.
Cleland TA and Linster C (2005) Computation in the olfactory system. Chem Senses
30:801–813.
Davenne M, Custody C, Charneau P and Lledo P-M (2005) In vivo imaging of migrating neurons
in the mammalian forebrain. Chem Senses 30:115–116.
Davidson BL and Breakefield XO (2003) Viral vectors for gene delivery to the nervous system.
Nat Rev Neurosci 4:353–364.
Döbrössy MDE, Aurousseau C, Le Moal M et al. (2003) Differential effects of learning on neurogenesis: Learning increases or decreases the number of newly born cells depending on their
birth date. Mol Psychiatry 8:974–982.
Doetsch F (2003) A niche for adult neural stem cells. Curr Opin Genet Dev 13:543–550.
Doetsch F, Caille I, Lim DA et al. (1999) Subventricular zone astrocytes are neural stem cells in
the adult mammalian brain. Cell 97:703–716.
Dupret D, Fabre A, Döbrössy MD et al. (2007) Spatial learning depends on both the addition and
removal of new hippocampal neurons. PLoS Biol 5:e214.
Ehninger D and Kempermann G (2006) Paradoxical effects of learning the Morris water maze on
adult hippocampal neurogenesis in mice may be explained by a combination of stress and
physical activity. Genes Brain Behav 5:29–39.
Eisthen HL (1997) Evolution of vertebrate olfactory systems. Brain Behav Evol 50:222–233.
Enwere E, Shingo T, Gregg C et  al. (2004) Aging results in reduced epidermal growth factor
receptor signaling, diminished olfactory neurogenesis, and deficits in fine olfactory discrimination. J Neurosci 24:8354–8365.
Eriksson PS, Perfilieva E, Bjork-Eriksson T et al. (1998) Neurogenesis in the adult human hippocampus. Nat Med 4:1313–1317.
Falk N, Holmstrom M, Carlen R et al. (2002) Gene delivery to adult neural stem cells. Exp Cell
Res 279:34–39.
Freeman WJ and Schneider W (1982) Changes in spatial patterns of rabbit olfactory EEG with
conditioning to odors. Psychophysiology 19:44–56.
Frielingsdorf H, Schwarz K, Brundin P et al. (2004) No evidence for new dopaminergic neurons
in the adult mammalian substantia nigra. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:10177–10182.
Garcia AD, Doan NB, Imura T et al. (2004) GFAP-expressing progenitors are the principal source
of constitutive neurogenesis in adult mouse forebrain. Nat Neurosci 7:1233–1241.
Garcia-Verdugo JM, Doetsch F. Wichterle H et al. (1998) Architecture and cell types of the adult
subventricular zone: in search of the stem cells. J Neurobiol 36:234–248.
Gheusi G, Cremer H, McLean H et al. (2000) Importance of newly generated neurons in the adult
OB for odor discrimination. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:1823–1828.
Goldman SA and Nottebohm F (1983) Neuronal production, migration and differentiation in a vocal
control nucleus of the adult female canary brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 80:2390–2394.
Gould E, Reeves AJ, Graziano MS et  al. (1999) Neurogenesis in the neocortex of the adult
­primates. Science 286:548–552.
Grubb MS, Nissant A, Murray K and Lledo PM (2008) Functional maturation of the first synapse
in olfaction: development and adult neurogenesis. J Neurosci 28:2919–2932.
Hack MA, Saghatelyan A, de Chevigny et al. (2005) Neuronal fate determinants of adult olfactory
bulb neurogenesis. Nat Neurosci 8:865–872.
Hensch TK (2005) Critical period plasticity in local cortical circuits. Nat Rev Neurosci
6:877–888.

16  Neurogenesis in the Adult OB

391

Hildebrand JG and Shepherd GM (1997) Mechanisms of olfactory discrimination: converging
evidence for common principles across phyla. Annu Rev Neurosci 20:595–631.
Hinds JW (1968) Autoradiographic study of histogenesis in the mouse olfactory bulb. II. Cell
proliferation and migration. J Comp Neurol 134: 305–322.
Jakobsson J, Ericson C, Jansson M et al. (2003) Targeted transgene expression in rat brain using
lentiviral vectors. J Neurosci Res 73:876–885.
Kempermann G (2006) Adult neurogenesis. Oxford University Press, New York.
Kohwi M, Osumi N, Rubenstein JL et al. (2005) Pax6 is required for making specific subpopulations of granule and periglomerular neurons in the olfactory bulb. J Neurosci 25:6997–7003.
Kohwi M, Petryniak MA, Long JE et al. (2007) A subpopulation of olfactory bulb GABAergic
interneurons is derived from Emx1- and Dlx5/6-expressing progenitors. J Neurosci
27:6878–6891.
Koketsu D, Mikami A, Miyamoto Y et al. (2003) Nonrenewal of neurons in the cerebral neocortex
of adult macaque monkeys. J Neurosci 23:937–942.
Kornack DR and Rakic P (1999) Continuation of neurogenesis in the hippocampus of the adult
macaque monkey. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:5768–5773.
Kornack DR and Rakic P (2001) Cell proliferation without neurogenesis in adult primate neocortex. Science 294:2127–2130.
Kosaka T and Kosaka K (2005) Structural organization of the glomerulus in the main olfactory
bulb. Chem Senses Suppl 1: i107–i108.
Kosaka K et al. (1997) Chemically defined neuron groups and their subpopulations in the glomerular layer of the rat main olfactory bulb. II. Prominent differences in the intraglomerular
dendritic arborization and their relationship to olfactory nerve terminals. Neuroscience
76:775–786.
Kosaka K et al. (1998) How simple is the organization of the olfactory glomerulus?: the heterogeneity of so-called periglomerular cells. Neurosci Res 30:101–110.
Laywell ED, Rakic P, Kukekov VG et al. (2000) Identification of a multipotent astrocytic stem
cell in the immature and adult mouse brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:13883–13888.
Lemasson M, Saghatelyan A, Olivo-Marin JC et al. (2005) Neonatal and adult neurogenesis provide two distinct populations of granule cells in the mouse OB. J Neurosci 25:6816–6825.
Lledo P-M and Gheusi G (2003) Olfactory processing in a changing brain. Neuroreport
14:1655–1663.
Lledo P-M and Lagier S (2006) Local interneurons transduce spatial coding into temporal patterning
in the mammalian olfactory bulb. Semin Cell Dev Biol 17:443–453.
Lledo P-M and Saghatelyan A (2005) Integrating new neurons into the adult olfactory bulb: joining the network, life/death decisions, and the effects of sensory experience. Trends Neurosci
28:248–254.
Lledo P-M, Gheusi G and Vincent JD (2005) Information processing in the mammalian olfactory
system. Physiol Rev 85:281–317.
Lois C and Alvarez-Buylla A (1994) Long-distance neuronal migration in the adult mammalian
brain. Science 264:1145–1148.
Lois C, Hong EJ, Pease S et al. (2002) Germline transmission and tissue-specific expression of
transgenes delivered by lentiviral vectors. Science 295:868–872.
Magavi SSP, Mitchell BD, Szentirmai O et al. (2005) Adult-born and preexisting olfactory granule
neurons undergo distinct experience-dependent modifications of their olfactory responses
in vivo. J Neurosci 25:10729–10739.
Malatesta P, Hack MA, Hartfuss E et al. (2003) Neuronal or glial progeny: regional differences in
radial glia fate. Neuron 37:751–764.
Malnic B, Hirono J, Sato T et al. (1999) Combinatorial receptor codes for odors. Cell 96:713–723.
Mandairon N, Jourdan F and Didier A (2003) Deprivation of sensory inputs to the olfactory bulb
up-regulates cell death and proliferation in the subventricular zone of adult mice. Neuroscience
119:507–516.
Marshall CAG, Novitch BG and Goldman JE (2005) Olig2 directs astrocyte and oligodendrocyte
formation in postnatal subventricular zone cells. J Neurosci 25:7289–7298.

392

P.-M. Lledo

Mechawar N, Saghatelyan A, Grailhe R et al. (2004) Nicotinic receptors regulate the survival of
newborn neurons in the adult OB. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:9822–9826.
Merkle FT, Mirzadeh Z and Alvarez-Buylla A (2007) Mosaic organization of neural stem cells in
the adult brain. Science 317:381–384.
Miwa N and Storm DR (2005) Odorant-induced activation of extracellular signal-regulated
kinase/mitogen-activated protein kinase in the olfactory bulb promotes survival of newly
formed granule cells. J Neurosci 25:5404–5412.
Mizrahi A and Katz LC (2003) Dendritic stability in the adult olfactory bulb. Nat Neurosci
6:1201–1207.
Mori K, Takahashi YK, Igarashi KM et al. (2006) Maps of odorant molecular features in the mammalian olfactory bulb. Physiol Rev 86:409–433.
Morshead CM, Reynolds BA, Craig CG et al. (1994) Neural stem cells in the adults mammalian
forebrain: a relatively quiescent subpopulation of subependymal cells. Neuron 13:1071–1082.
Nissant A, Bardy C, Katagiri H et al. (2009) Adult neurogenesis promotes synaptic plasticity in
the olfactory bulb. Nat Neurosci 12:728–730.
Oppenheim RW (1991) Cell death during development of the nervous system. Annu Rev Neurosci
14:453–501.
Parrish-Aungst S, Shipley MT, Erdelyi et al. (2007) Quantitative analysis of neuronal diversity in
the mouse olfactory bulb. J Comp Neurol 501:825–836.
Peretto P, Merighi A, Fasolo A et al. (1997) Glial tubes in the rostral migratory stream of the adult
rat. Brain Res Bull 42:9–21.
Peretto P, Merighi A, Fasolo A et al. (1999) The subependymal layer in rodents: a site of structural
plasticity and cell migration in the adult mammalian brain. Brain Res Bull 49:221–243.
Petreanu L and Alvarez-Buylla A (2002) Maturation and death of adult-born OB granule neurons:
Role of olfaction. J Neurosci 22:6106–6113.
Philpot BD, Lim JH and Brunjes PC (1997) Activity-dependent regulation of calcium-binding
proteins in the developing rat olfactory bulb. J Comp Neurol 387:12–26.
Pressler RT and Strowbridge BW (2006) Blanes cells mediate persistent feedforward inhibition
onto granule cells in the olfactory bulb. Neuron 49:889–904.
Rakic P (2002) Adult neurogenesis in mammals, an identity crisis. J Neurosci 22:614–618.
Rochefort C, Gheusi G, Vincent JD et al. (2002) Enriched odor exposure increases the number of
newborn neurons in the adult OB and improves odor memory. J Neurosci 22:2679–2689.
Rogelius N, Ericson C and Lundberg C (2005) In vivo labeling of neuroblasts in the subventricular
zone of rats. J Neurosci Methods 142:285–293.
Rubinson DA, Dillon CP, Kwiatkowski AV et al. (2003) A lentivirus-based system to functionally
silence genes in primary mammalian cells, stem cells and transgenic mice by RNA interference. Nat Genet 33:401–406.
Saghatelyan A, Roux P, Migliore M et al. (2005) Activity-dependent adjustments of the inhibitory
network in the adult OB following early postnatal deprivation. Neuron 46:103–116.
Schmidt-Hieber C, Jonas P and Bischofberger J (2004) Enhanced synaptic plasticity in newly
generated granule cells of the adult hippocampus. Nature 429:184–187.
Schoppa NE and Urban NN (2003) Dendritic processing within olfactory bulb circuits. Trends
Neurosci 26:501–506.
Scotto-Lomassese S, Strambi C, Strambi A et  al. (2003) Suppression of adult neurogenesis
impairs olfactory learning and memory in an adult insect. J Neurosci 23:9289–9296.
Seri B, Garcia-Verdugo JM, McEwen BS and Alvarez-Buylla A (2001) Astrocytes give rise to
new neurons in the adult mammalian hippocampus. J Neurosci 21:7153–7160.
Shepherd GM (2006) Smell images and the flavour system in the human brain. Nature
444:316–321.
Shepherd GM, Chen WR and Greer CA (2004) Olfactory bulb. In: Shepherd GM (ed) The synaptic organization of the brain (5th ed.), edited by Oxford University Press, New York, pp.
165–216.
Shepherd GM, Chen WR, Willhite D et  al. (2007) The olfactory granule cell: from classical
enigma to central role in olfactory processing. Brain Res Rev 55:373–382.

16  Neurogenesis in the Adult OB

393

Shingo T, Gregg C, Enwere E et al. (2003) Pregnancy-stimulated neurogenesis in the adult female
forebrain mediated by prolactin. Science 299:117–120.
Shipley MT and Ennis M (1996) Functional organization of olfactory system. J Neurobiol
30:123–176.
Stewart RR, Hoge GJ, Zigova T et al. (2002) Neural progenitor cells of the neonatal rat anterior
subventricular zone express functional GABA(A) receptors. J Neurobiol 50:305–322.
Stone DM, Grillo M, Margolis FL et  al. (1991) Differential effect of functional olfactory bulb
deafferentation on tyrosine hydroxylase and glutamic acid decarboxylase messenger RNA
levels in rodent juxtaglomerular neurons. J Comp Neurol 311:223–233.
Tiscornia G, Singer O, Ikawa M et al. (2003) A general method for gene knockdown in mice by
using lentiviral vectors expressing small interfering RNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
100:1844–1848.
van Praag H, Kempermann G, Gage FH (1999) Running increases cell proliferation and neurogenesis in the adult mouse dentate gyrus. Nat Neurosci 2:266–270.
Wachowiak M and Shipley MT (2006) Coding and synaptic processing of sensory information in
the glomerular layer of the olfactory bulb. Semin Cell Dev Biol 17:411–423.
Washbourne P and McAllister AK (2002) Techniques for gene transfer into neurons. Curr Opin
Neurobiol 12:566–573.
Whitman MC and Greer CA (2007) Synaptic integration of adult-generated olfactory bulb granule
cells: basal axodendritic centrifugal input precedes apical dendrodendritic local circuits.
J Neurosci 27:9951–9961.
Willhite DC, Nguyen KT, Masurkar AV et al. (2006) Viral tracing identifies distributed columnar
organization in the olfactory bulb. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:12592–12597.
Wilson RI and Mainen ZF (2006) Early events in olfactory processing. Annu Rev Neurosci
29:163–201.
Winner B, Cooper-Kuhn CM, Aigner R et al. (2002) Long-term survival and cell death of newly
generated neurons in the adult rat OB. Eur J Neurosci 16:1681–1689.
Yamaguchi M and Mori K (2005) Critical period for sensory experience-dependent survival of
newly generated granule cells in the adult mouse OB. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:
9697–9702.
Young JM, Friedman C, Williams EM et al. (2002) Different evolutionary processes shaped the
mouse and human olfactory receptor gene families. Hum Mol Genet 11:535–546.
Young KM, Fogarty M, Kessaris N et al. (2007) Subventricular zone stem cells are heterogeneous
with respect to their embryonic origins and neurogenic fates in the adult olfactory bulb.
J Neurosci 27:8286–8296.
Zou DJ, Feinstein P, Rivers AL et al. (2004) Postnatal refinement of peripheral olfactory projections. Science 304:1976–1979.

Chapter 17

Control of Adult-Born Neuron Production
by Converging GABA and Glutamate Signals
Jean-Claude Platel and Angélique Bordey

Abstract  The production of adult-born neuron is an ongoing process ­accounting
~10,000 immature neurons migrating to the olfactory bulb every day. This high
turnover rate necessitates profound control mechanisms converging onto neural
progenitors and neuroblasts to achieve adequate adult-born neuron production.
Here, we elaborate on a novel epigenetic control of adult neurogenesis via highly
coordinated nonsynaptic cell–cell signaling. This communication engages the
neurotransmitters GABA and glutamate whose extracellular concentrations depend
on neuroblast number and high affinity uptake systems in neural stem cells.
Neuroblasts release GABA providing a negative feedback control of stem cell proliferation and instructing them on the size of the neuroblast pool. Recent findings
show an unexpected mosaic expression of glutamate receptors leading to calcium
elevations in migrating neuroblasts and differential role on their development.
Remarkably, stem cells act as lighthouses releasing glutamate onto neuroblast
sailing by, thus providing migratory, survival, and proliferative cues. Finally, we
propose that the timing of neurotransmitter release and their spatial diffusion will
determine the convergent co-activation of neuroblasts and stem cells, and provide a
steady-state level of neuron production. Upon external impact or injury this signaling may adjust to a new steady-state level, thus providing nonsynaptic scaling of
neuroblast production.

J.-C. Platel and A. Bordey (*)
Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine,
333 Cedar Street, FMB 422, New Haven, CT 06520-8082, USA
and
Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale University School of Medicine,
333 Cedar Street, FMB 422, New Haven, CT 06520-8082, USA
e-mail: angelique.bordey@yale.edu

T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9_17, © Springer 2011

395

396

J.-C. Platel and A. Bordey

17.1 Introduction
The production of adult-born neurons persists in two brain regions, the subventricular
zone (SVZ) and the dentate gyrus subgranular zone (SGZ) in the hippocampus. The
SVZ contains the largest pool of dividing neural stem cells in the adult mammalian
brain, including in humans (Sanai et al., 2004; Curtis et al., 2007). Divisions of stem
cells generate intermediate progenitors (called transit amplifying cells), which in turn
divide to give rise to neuroblasts (see Chap. 12). Neural stem cells express glial fibrillary acidic protein, a marker of astrocyte, and display other properties of astrocytes
(Liu et al., 2006). The SVZ neural stem cells will be called stem cells or GFAP cells
interchangeably throughout the text. It remains unknown whether every GFAP cell
can behave as a stem cell. However, the properties of GFAP cells described below are
found in all GFAP cells, suggesting that GFAP cells and stem cells are equivalent
regarding our findings. Neuroblasts migrate along the rostral migratory stream
(RMS) to the olfactory bulb where they differentiate into interneurons. Here, we
discuss data obtained in the SVZ-to-olfactory bulb axis. Data discussing GABAergic
signaling in the SGZ can be found in other reviews (Ge et al., 2007; Bordey, 2007).
Adult-born neuron production is an ongoing process. Estimates suggest that
~10,000 neurons migrate to the olfactory bulb every day (Lledo et al., 2006). This
high turnover rate necessitates profound homeostatic control mechanisms. The
production of neuroblasts and ultimately their number reaching the olfactory bulb
is determined by the combined outcome of cell proliferation, migration, and survival, each of which is regulated by genetic and epigenetic mechanisms. For
example, it is thought that each cell has an internal clock determining the number
of divisions it can undergo or the length of time it can remain in cycle. Epigenetic
factors, which include mitogenic or antiproliferative factors in the local environment, have been shown to control the length of the cell cycle or the number of cells
cycling and the speed of neuroblast migration prior to their integration into the
olfactory bulb circuitry [see (Pathania et al., 2010) for review].
Here, we will discuss the function of the local signaling molecules GABA and
glutamate on cell proliferation, migration, and survival in the SVZ prior to the
acquisition of synaptic inputs. While we start to understand how these signals operate at the single cell level (although much remains to be explored), we do not
clearly understand how these signals are integrated at a population level to deliver
the appropriate number of neurons. We propose that cell number controls the concentration and supply of local GABA and glutamate that determines the level of
receptor activation thus providing a feedback control on cell production. We argue
that convergent paracrine GABA and glutamate signaling is necessary for finetuning the level of neuron production upon external demand or injury, thus providing a nonsynaptic scaling of neurogenesis. Finally, we discuss that identification of
various glutamate receptors in neural stem cells and neuroblasts provide novel
pharmacological targets to increase the production of adult-born neurons and promote functional repair following injury or neurodegenerative diseases.

17  Control of Adult-Born Neuron Production by Converging GABA

397

17.2 Expression of GABA and Glutamate Receptors
in Neuroblasts
GABA’s action is mediated by at least three types of GABA receptors (Chebib and
Johnston, 1999): GABAB receptors that are coupled to Ca2+ or K+ channels by
means of G proteins and intracellular second messengers; and GABAA and GABAC
receptors that are ligand-gated Cl− channels. Neuroblasts express classical benzodiazepine-sensitive GABAA receptors (Stewart et  al., 2002; Wang et  al., 2003b)
(Fig. 17.1). As shown in immature neurons, GABA is depolarizing in SVZ neuroblasts, presumably due to high level intracellular chloride in these cells (Wang
et al., 2003b). Using calcium imaging, we recently reported that ~90% of SVZ cells
respond to GABA with an increase in intracellular calcium (Platel et  al., 2008).
This result indicates that GABAA receptors are ubiquitous among neuroblasts presumably due to their critical function on neuroblast development (see section
below). It remains to be determined whether SVZ neuroblasts express functional
GABAB and GABAC receptors.

Fig. 17.1  Chart summarizing known GABA and glutamate signaling molecules along the SVZ
cell lineage. GFAP stem cells contain glutamate while doublecortin (DCX)-positive neuroblasts
synthesize and release GABA. Both GFAP cells and neuroblasts express functional GABAA receptors. Neuroblasts express a mosaic of glutamate receptors including ionotropic and metabotropic
receptors. In addition, the level of receptor expression increases during their migration from the
SVZ to the RMS of the olfactory bulb. GFAP cells express high affinity GABA and glutamate
transporters not expressed in neuroblasts. The expression of other high affinity transporters
remains to be explored. The presence of GABA and glutamate signaling molecules in transit amplifying cells (TAC), which express epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), remains unexplored

398

J.-C. Platel and A. Bordey

It has become evident that neuroblasts express an ­unexpected large repertoire of
glutamate receptors much earlier than previously anticipated (Fig.  17.1). In neurons, glutamatergic signals are conveyed by different glutamate receptor subtypes,
namely ionotropic NMDA and non-NMDA or AMPA/kainate receptors and
metabotropic glutamate receptors. Eight genes encoding mGluRs have been classified into three groups: group I (mGluR1 and 5), group II (mGluR2 and 3), and
group III (mGluR4, 6, 7, 8) (Coutinho and Knopfel, 2002). Group I mGluRs are
coupled to phospholipase C and mobilize Ca2+ from IP3-regulated intracellular
stores. Kainate receptors exist as multiple subtypes with a distinct biology and are
composed of GLUK5-7, GLUK1, and GLUK2 subunits [IUPHAR nomenclature of the
receptors that are also known as GluR5-7, KA1, and KA2, for review see (Bettler
and Mulle, 1995; Lerma et al., 2001; Pinheiro and Mulle, 2006)]. GLUK5-7 either
alone or in combination with GLUK1 or GLUK2 subunits form functional ion channels. Homomeric GLUK1 or GLUK2 receptors bind kainate with high affinity, but do
not form functional ion channels. Recent findings from our group suggest the
expression of functional AMPA/kainate receptors in neuroblasts in the SVZ and
RMS (Platel et  al., 2007). Using immunohistochemistry, calcium imaging, and
more selective glutamate receptor ligands, we recently found that neuroblasts
express functional mGluR5 and GLUK5-containing kainate receptors (Platel et al.,
2008). This finding was based on the pharmacology of the calcium responses. In
particular, agonists of group I mGluR (DHPG) and GLUK5-containing kainate
receptors (ATPA) induced calcium responses in SVZ cells that were blocked by
selective antagonists of mGluR5, and antagonists of heteromeric and homomeric
GLUK5 kainate receptors. Only ~60% of the SVZ cells responded to ATPA while
~90% of SVZ cells responded to a broad spectrum agonist of ­kainate receptors,
domoate. These data suggest that neuroblasts express additional kainate receptors
that remained to be identified. In addition, published data from our lab suggest that
SVZ neuroblasts express functional AMPA receptors (Platel et al., 2007), but this
finding needs to be confirmed and the subunit composition of the receptors identified. Recent data from our lab show that no NMDA-induced currents were observed
in neuroblasts of the lateral SVZ (i.e. along the lateral side of the lateral ventricle)
(Platel et  al., 2010). However, ~30–40% neuroblasts express functional NMDA
receptors in the dorso-lateral SVZ using both calcium imaging and perforated patch
clamp recordings.
There are three important remarks regarding GABA and glutamate receptor
expression in neuroblasts. First, there is a mosaic expression of glutamate receptors.
About 40% of SVZ cells express GABAA receptors and both GLUK5 and mGluR5,
26% express either GLUK5 or mGluR5 with GABAA receptors while ~90% of neuroblasts express GABAA receptors either alone (24%) or with one these other receptors.
These data were obtained by applying different agonists onto the same cells to
obtain a relative receptor distribution. A subset of those neuroblasts expresses functional NMDA receptors. It remains to be determined whether neuroblasts expressing NMDA as well as AMPA receptors also co-express the other receptors. This
different pattern of receptor expression further illustrates the diversity in neuroblast
properties. In addition, neuroblasts have been shown to be predetermined to become

17  Control of Adult-Born Neuron Production by Converging GABA

399

certain types of olfactory bulb interneurons (Merkle et  al., 2007). Second,
­neuroblasts progressively acquire more receptors during their tangential migration
to the olfactory bulb. As a result in the RMS of the olfactory bulb ~90% neuroblasts
express NMDA receptors prior to entering the synaptic circuit of the olfactory bulb.
These findings suggest that neuroblasts become more differentiated towards a neuronal phenotype during their tangential migration and become primed to integrate
into the olfactory bulb network. Third, the diversity of glutamate receptors in neuroblasts provides additional pharmacological targets for novel therapeutics aimed
at controlling adult-born neuron production.

17.3 Non-Canonical GABAergic and Glutamatergic Signaling
Defining the organization of GABAergic or glutamatergic signaling requires the
identification of source cells that release GABA or glutamate, target cells that
express functional receptors, and uptake mechanisms to limit extracellular GABA
and glutamate accumulation and receptor desensitization (Fig. 17.2).

Fig. 17.2  Simplified diagram illustrating GABAergic and glutamatergic signaling in the SVZ and
RMS. GABA released from neuroblasts activates GABAA receptors in both surrounding neuroblasts
and GFAP cells leading to a reduction of their rate of proliferation. Glutamate released from GFAP
cells (i.e. stem cells of the SVZ) activates glutamate receptors on migrating neuroblasts. Glutamate
receptors include NMDA and AMPA/kainate receptors and mGluRs (not shown). Glutamate receptor activation promotes neuroblast survival as well as proliferation. Ambient glutamate is taken by
high affinity glutamate transporters expressed in GFAP cells surrounding neuroblasts. The illustration also shows that there is a mosaic of receptors in the neuroblast population

400

J.-C. Platel and A. Bordey

Many components of GABAergic signaling have been identified in the SVZ
(Fig. 17.1) and have been reviewed elsewhere (Bordey, 2006, 2007). SVZ neuroblasts synthesize and release GABA as shown by immunostaining for GABA
(Stewart et  al., 2002; Wang et  al., 2003b) and by patch clamp recordings using
GABAA receptors as sensors for GABA (Liu et al., 2005). To identify recorded cells
as either neuroblasts or GFAP cells, we recorded these different cell types and
reported striking differences in their biophysical properties and current profiles
(Wang et  al., 2003a; Liu et  al., 2005). To specifically record astrocytes, we used
transgenic mice expressing GFP under the human GFAP promoter (hGFAP-GFP)
to visually identify GFAP cells prior to recording. Using patch clamp recordings,
we can now determine the cell identity based on their passive properties and their
ionic signature. Both neuroblasts and GFAP cells express functional GABAA receptors as shown using patch clamp and calcium imaging that induce cell depolarization (see above for neuroblasts) (Liu et  al., 2005; Young et  al., 2010). To image
calcium dynamics in GFAP cells, we use transgenic mice where a Gq-coupled
receptors (called Mas-related gene A1, MrgA1) fused to GFP selectively in GFAPexpressing cells using the inducible tet-off system (called MrgA1 mice). Mice
expressing the tetracycline transactivator (tTA) under the hGFAP promoter were
crossed to mice in which the MrgA1 receptor was transcribed off the tet (tetO)
minimal promoter. In the absence of doxycycline, astrocytes express MrgA1:GFP.
In these mice, GFP is expressed in the membrane allowing visualization of an outline of SVZ GFAP cells without masking the fluorescence from the calcium indicator dye. Ambient GABA tonically activates GABAA receptors on both neuroblasts
and GFAP cells (Nguyen et al., 2003; Bolteus and Bordey, 2004; Liu et al., 2005),
and is taken up by GAT4 GABA transporters expressed in GFAP cells (Bolteus and
Bordey, 2004; Liu et al., 2005). It was recently shown that neuroblasts lack the classical neuronal GABA transporters GAT1, suggesting that GFAP cells are a key
player in maintaining ambient GABA levels (Bolteus and Bordey, 2004; Platel
et al., 2007). Liu et al. (2005) also reported that electrical stimulation or high K+
application induced GABA released from SVZ cells that was independent of action
potentials, external calcium and the SNARE vesicular machinery (Liu et al., 2005).
Together with the absence of synapses in the SVZ at the electron microscopic levels
(Doetsch et al., 1997) and the lack of immunostaining for synapsin 1, a marker of
synapses, they concluded that GABA signaling was non-synaptic but rather paracrine. It remains unknown whether transit amplifying cells contain GABA and
express GABAergic signaling mechanisms.
By comparison with GABAergic signaling, glutamatergic signaling had
received very little attention until now, perhaps because of the ubiquitous expression of GABAA receptors in immature neurons as compared to the low expression
level of glutamate receptors in the SVZ. In addition, ionotropic glutamate receptors
suffered from the lack of selective agonists and antagonists until very recently.
Nevertheless, several elements of glutamatergic signaling are now known to be
present in the SVZ. Glutamate immunostaining is intense in GFAP cells while
very faint in surrounding neuroblasts (Platel et  al., 2007). Using immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy in collaboration with Dr. Mary Rubio, we

17  Control of Adult-Born Neuron Production by Converging GABA

401

also found that GFAP cells express vesicular transporter 1 (VGLUT1) in the SVZ,
suggesting that GFAP cells may release glutamate via a vesicular mechanism
(Platel et  al., 2010). Using the MrgA1 mice (described above), it was clearly
shown that glutamate release from GFAP cells is calcium dependent and released
glutamate activates NMDA receptors in migrating neuroblasts (Platel et al., 2010).
These data were shown using patch clamp recording of neuroblasts and applying
a nonendogenous ligand of MrgA1 receptors. GFAP cells also express high affinity glutamate transporters GLAST and GLT-1 (Liu et al., 2006). The expression of
neuronal glutamate transporters in neuroblasts has not been examined. As mentioned above, neuroblasts express different types of glutamate receptors. We
recently reported that GFAP cells did not express functional AMPA receptors (Liu
et  al., 2006), but the expression of other types of glutamate receptors in GFAP
cells remains to be thoroughly examined.
Collectively, GFAP cells in the SVZ, i.e. neural stem cells, exhibit a sophisticated release mechanism for glutamate as well as high affinity glutamate transporters. GFAP cells are thus in charge of glutamatergic signaling in the SVZ. By
contrast neuroblasts synthesize and release GABA and are thus in charge of the
GABA supply in the SVZ, but GFAP cells will maintain extracellular GABA levels
through high affinity GABA transporters and thus its availability to SVZ cells.

17.4 GABA: A Stop Signal of Neuron Production
But an Enhancer of Neuron Maturation
Tonic GABAA receptor activation reduces the number of proliferative neuroblasts
(Nguyen et  al., 2003) and stem cells (i.e. GFAP cells) (Liu et  al., 2005). It also
reduces the speed of neuroblast migration (Bolteus and Bordey, 2004) perhaps as a
result of its enhancement of dendritic growth (Gascon et al., 2006). The intracellular mechanisms leading to these effects on cell development as well as the mode
of Ca2+-dependent GABA release are not clearly understood. It is in particular true
for the antiproliferative effect of GABA on stem cell proliferation. A recent study
reported that GABA blocks embryonic stem cell proliferation through S-phase
checkpoint kinases and the histone variant H2AX independently of Ca2+ increases
(Andang et al., 2008). This mechanism remains to be explored in SVZ stem cells.

17.5 Glutamate: A Mitogenic and Survival Signal
for Neuroblast
It was recently reported that adult mice lacking mGluR5 or treated with mGluR5
antagonists showed a dramatic reduction in the number of proliferating cells in the
SVZ (Di Giorgi-Gerevini et  al., 2005). These findings suggest that mGluR5 are
tonically activated by ambient glutamate presumably originating from SVZ and

402

J.-C. Platel and A. Bordey

RMS GFAP cells (see above). The function of GLUK5-containing kainate receptors
has never been explored on cell development prior synapse formation. Nevertheless,
considering that neuroblasts express functional GLUK5 receptors, which leads to
calcium increase, we explore its function on neuroblast migration. To do so, we
used the whole mount preparation of the entire lateral ventricle from postnatal day
20–25 transgenic mice carrying green fluorescent protein under the doublecortin
promoter. Using this new preparation, we confirmed that the GABAA receptor
antagonist bicuculline increased the speed of neuroblast migration by an average of
27%. While the mGluR5 antagonist MPEP did not affect the speed of neuroblast
migration, a GLUK5 antagonist increased the migration speed by an average of 38%.
These data show that although both GLUK5 receptor and mGluR5 activation
increases Ca2+ in neuroblasts, only GLUK5 receptors tonically reduce the speed of
neuroblast migration along the lateral ventricle.
The function of NMDA receptors has only been recently explored on the development of neuroblasts in the SVZ and RMS. NMDA receptors in migrating neuroblasts
are critical to transmit survival cue from surrounding astrocytes. Indeed, we found
that a one-time intraperitoneal injection of a NMDA receptor antagonist results in a
significant increase in the number of apoptotic cells in the RMS. In addition, singlecell genetic removal of functional NMDA receptors in neuroblasts resulted in apoptosis of neuroblasts along their migratory route prior to entering the olfactory bulb
circuitry (Platel et  al., 2010). To knockout NMDA receptors, we used transgenic
mice expressing NR1 subunit floxed by LoxP sites. Expression of Cre recombinase
in SVZ cells using neonatal electroporation resulted in NR1 excision and NMDA
receptor knockout that was validated using patch clamp recordings and calcium
imaging. Neuroblast apoptosis led to a 30–40% decrease in the number of ­neuroblasts
that reach the olfactory bulb and up to 60% reduction in the number of synaptically
integrated granule cells in 2 months-old mice.
Collectively, we propose that using distinct Ca2+-dependent intracellular pathways each glutamate receptor type, GluR5 kainate receptor, mGluR5 and NMDA
receptors differentially affects the development of neuroblasts. As in other developing systems (Schlett, 2006), we propose that glutamate acting at both ionotropic
and metabotropic receptors positively affects the production of adult-born
neurons.

17.6 Convergent Co-Activation of GABA and Glutamate
onto Neuroblasts
GABA and glutamate receptor activation has been studied independently. However,
activation of each receptor subtype may, in addition to have different outcome on
cell development, modulates their respective function at the single cell level.
Although there are no data available on this topic, we propose two hypothetical
interactions based on the coincident release of GABA and glutamate in the SVZ
and RMS. We indeed propose that GABA released from neuroblasts can activate

17  Control of Adult-Born Neuron Production by Converging GABA

403

both GABAA receptors on neuroblasts and GFAP cells. We have preliminary data
suggesting that GABA’s action on GFAP cells induces glutamate release resulting
in the activation of glutamate receptors in neuroblasts. As a first example of interaction, activation of GABAA receptors may be necessary for removing the Mg2+ block
of NMDA receptors thus allowing NMDA receptor activation in neuroblasts. It is
thus conceivable that GABAA receptor activation in GFAP cells is necessary for
neuroblasts to sense glutamate and receive a survival cue through NMDA receptor
activation. As a second example, it is possible that GABAA receptor activation
shunts the depolarizing effect of AMPA receptors in neuroblasts without affecting
Ca2+ influx. GABA receptor activation may also interfere with the intracellular
pathway activated following mGluR activation. For example, GABAA receptor
activation in neuroblasts leads to Ca2+ increase, which may enhance the release of
Ca2+ from intracellular stores following mGluR activation. It is indeed well known
that Ca2+ acts as a co-agonist of IP3 receptors (Mak et al., 1998). Those are only a
few examples of possible convergent interactions between GABA and glutamate on
single cells through the expression of a mosaic of receptors. The functional significance of such interactions will need to be explored.

17.7 Integration of GABA and Glutamate Signals
at the Population Level
At the population levels, the ambient GABA concentration provides information to
stem cells about the size of the neuroblast pool (i.e. number of neuroblasts). As
more neuroblasts are generated, more GABA is expected to be released into the
extracellular space, resulting in increased GABAA receptor activation in stem cells.
Thus, GABA carries information on the number of neuroblasts produced and provides a negative feedback control of stem cell proliferation and therefore neuroblast
production. This negative feedback reconciles well with the constant migration of
neuroblasts to the olfactory bulb, which would limit ambient GABA accumulation
in the SVZ, and with increased proliferation of GFAP cells following elimination
of neuroblasts (Doetsch et al., 1999). Assuming that stem cells release glutamate,
glutamate has to diffuse variable distances to activate glutamate receptors on
migrating neuroblasts. The glutamate concentration and receptor location may
determine which receptors are activated resulting in selective effect on neuroblast
development. It remains unclear how GABA and glutamate signals are integrated
in neuroblasts. Both lead to Ca2+ increases but also shunt each other.
Based on our recent finding that stem cells (i.e. SVZ GFAP cells) do not migrate,
we propose that stem cells act as lighthouses in the SVZ where neuroblast sail by.
During their passage, neuroblasts receive signals from stem cells that are expected
to positively affect their development. We propose that one of these signals is carried by glutamate. Interestingly, one stem cell may control or synchronize in a
phase of development a group of neuroblasts while neuroblasts as a group can
affect a single stem cell. In addition, GFAP cells, i.e. stem cells, are in charge of

404

J.-C. Platel and A. Bordey

determining whether their progeny will reproduce and survive through glutamatergic
signaling while neuroblasts as a group provide feedback information to stem cells
through GABAergic signaling.

17.8 Upon External Impact or Injury Signaling Within
the SVZ May Adjust to a New Steady-State Level, Thus
Providing Nonsynaptic Scaling of Neuron Production
GABAergic and glutamatergic signaling provides a homeostatic control of adult
born neuron production (Fig. 17.3). This signaling is complex and prone to regulations at different levels, e.g. receptor and transporter regulation, release regulation
at the molecular levels or via interaction with Ca2+ dynamics. For example, upon
injury it is now well-known that proliferation in the SVZ is increased, but this is
not accompanied with a run-away increase in neuroblast production. This suggests
that signaling within the SVZ reaches a new stated-state level of neuroblast production. We speculate that GABAergic and glutamatergic signaling provide a
nonsynaptic scaling of neuron production controlled by external inputs. For
example, cytokines and chemokines release from the injury site or activated
microglia may induce the up-regulation of receptors in SVZ cells leading to a new
steady-state of cell activation. Multiple feedback mechanisms are likely built-in to
prevent overproduction of neuroblasts following injury, but lead to a new steadystate level of neuroblast production. Such a mechanism involving nonsynaptic
communication among SVZ cell may provide a tightly controlled upregulation of
cell production.

Fig. 17.3  GABAergic and glutamatergic nonsynaptic scaling of adult neurogenesis. This simple
diagram illustrates that nonsynaptic GABAergic and glutamatergic signaling balance each other
to maintain a stable level of neuroblast production and neurogenesis. Upon injury or insult to the
brain, nonsynaptic signaling may be up-regulated to a new-steady-state leading to an enhanced
production of adult-born neurons

17  Control of Adult-Born Neuron Production by Converging GABA

405

17.9 Conclusion
We rarely get tumors in the SVZ suggesting very strong control mechanisms of
neuroblast production. We propose that glutamate and GABA act as homeostatic
signals to regulate neuroblast production. These signals are prone to regulation by
other factors. For example, growth factors may up- or down-regulate the expression
of transporter and/or receptors leading to new steady-state levels of ambient neurotransmitter levels and receptor activation. The production of neuroblasts may thus
be scaled up or down following drug injection or injuries modulating GABA and
glutamate signaling. Understanding the role of each of these receptors and transporters could offer the opportunity to pharmacologically control cell production in
the SVZ under control conditions or following injury. Reciprocally, it is important
to determine whether clinically approved drugs have negative effects on adult
neurogenesis.
Acknowledgments  This work was supported by grants from the National Institute of Health
(NS048256 and DC007681, A.B.) and Yale Brown-Coxe fellowship (J-C.P.).

References
Andang M, Hjerling-Leffler J, Moliner A, Lundgren TK, Castelo-Branco G, Nanou E, Pozas E,
Bryja V, Halliez S, Nishimaru H, Wilbertz J, Arenas E, Koltzenburg M, Charnay P, El Manira A,
Ibanez CF, Ernfors P (2008) Histone H2AX-dependent GABA(A) receptor regulation of stem
cell proliferation. Nature 451:460–464.
Bettler B, Mulle C (1995) Review: neurotransmitter receptors. II. AMPA and kainate receptors.
Neuropharmacology 34:123–139.
Bolteus AJ, Bordey A (2004) GABA release and uptake regulate neuronal precursor migration in
the postnatal subventricular zone. J Neurosci 24:7623–7631.
Bordey A (2006) Adult neurogenesis: basic concepts of signaling. Cell Cycle 5:722–728.
Bordey A (2007) Enigmatic GABAergic networks in adult neurogenic zones. Brain Res Brain Res
Rev 53:124–134.
Chebib M, Johnston GA (1999) The ‘ABC’ of GABA receptors: a brief review. Clin Exp
Pharmacol Physiol 26:937–940.
Coutinho V, Knopfel T (2002) Metabotropic glutamate receptors: electrical and chemical signaling properties. Neuroscientist 8:551–561.
Curtis MA, Kam M, Nannmark U, Anderson MF, Axell MZ, Wikkelso C, Holtas S, Roon-Mom WM,
Bjork-Eriksson T, Nordborg C, Frisen J, Dragunow M, Faull RL, Eriksson PS (2007) Human neuroblasts migrate to the olfactory bulb via a lateral ventricular extension. Science 315:1243–1249.
Di Giorgi-Gerevini V, Melchiorri D, Battaglia G, Ricci-Vitiani L, Ciceroni C, Busceti CL,
Biagioni F, Iacovelli L, Canudas AM, Parati E, De Maria R, Nicoletti F (2005) Endogenous
activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors supports the proliferation and survival of neural
progenitor cells. Cell Death Differ 12:1124–1133.
Doetsch F, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (1997) Cellular composition and three-dimensional
organization of the subventricular germinal zone in the adult mammalian brain. J Neurosci
17:5046–5061.
Doetsch F, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (1999) Regeneration of a germinal layer in the
adult mammalian brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:11619–11624.

406

J.-C. Platel and A. Bordey

Gascon E, Dayer AG, Sauvain MO, Potter G, Jenny B, De Roo M, Zgraggen E, Demaurex N,
Muller D, Kiss JZ (2006) GABA regulates dendritic growth by stabilizing lamellipodia in
newly generated interneurons of the olfactory bulb. J Neurosci 26:12956–12966.
Ge S, Pradhan DA, Ming GL, Song H (2007) GABA sets the tempo for activity-dependent adult
neurogenesis. Trends Neurosci 30:1–8.
Lerma J, Paternain AV, Rodriguez-Moreno A, Lopez-Garcia JC (2001) Molecular physiology of
kainate receptors. Physiol Rev 81:971–998.
Liu X, Wang Q, Haydar TF, Bordey A (2005) Nonsynaptic GABA signaling in postnatal subventricular zone controls proliferation of GFAP-expressing progenitors. Nat Neurosci
8:1179–1187.
Liu X, Bolteus AJ, Balkin DM, Henschel O, Bordey A (2006) GFAP-expressing cells in the postnatal subventricular zone display a unique glial phenotype intermediate between radial glia
and astrocytes. Glia 54:394–410.
Lledo PM, Alonso M, Grubb MS (2006) Adult neurogenesis and functional plasticity in neuronal
circuits. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:179–193.
Mak DO, McBride S, Foskett JK (1998) Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate [correction of tris-phosphate]
activation of inositol trisphosphate [correction of tris-phosphate] receptor Ca2+ channel by
ligand tuning of Ca2+ inhibition. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:15821–15825.
Merkle FT, Mirzadeh Z, Alvarez-Buylla A (2007) Mosaic organization of neural stem cells in the
adult brain. Science 317:381–384.
Nguyen L, Malgrange B, Breuskin I, Bettendorff L, Moonen G, Belachew S, Rigo JM (2003)
Autocrine/paracrine activation of the GABA(A) receptor inhibits the proliferation of neurogenic polysialylated neural cell adhesion molecule-positive (PSA-NCAM+) precursor cells
from postnatal striatum. J Neurosci 23:3278–3294.
Pathania M, Yan LD, Bordey A (2010) A symphony of signals conduct early and late stages of
adult neurogenesis. Neuropharmacology 58:865–876.
Pinheiro P, Mulle C (2006) Kainate receptors. Cell Tissue Res 326:457–482.
Platel JC, Lacar B, Bordey A (2007) GABA and glutamate signaling: homeostatic control of adult
forebrain neurogenesis. J Mol Histol 38:602–610.
Platel J, Heintz T, Young S, Gordon V, Bordey A (2008) Tonic activation of GLUK5 kainate
receptors decreases neuroblast migration in a whole mount preparation of the subventricular
zone. J Physiol (Lond) 586:3783–3793.
Platel JC, Dave KA, Gordon V, Lacar B, Rubio ME, Bordey A (2010) NMDA receptors activated
by subventricular zone astrocytic glutamate are critical for neuroblast survival prior to entering
a synaptic network. Neuron 65:859–872.
Sanai N, Tramontin AD, Quinones-Hinojosa A, Barbaro NM, Gupta N, Kunwar S, Lawton MT,
McDermott MW, Parsa AT, Manuel-Garcia VJ, Berger MS, Alvarez-Buylla A (2004) Unique
astrocyte ribbon in adult human brain contains neural stem cells but lacks chain migration.
Nature 427:740–744.
Schlett K (2006) Glutamate as a modulator of embryonic and adult neurogenesis. Curr Top Med
Chem 6:949–960.
Stewart RR, Hoge GJ, Zigova T, Luskin MB (2002) Neural progenitor cells of the neonatal rat
anterior subventricular zone express functional GABA(A) receptors. J Neurobiol
50:305–322.
Wang DD, Krueger DD, Bordey A (2003a) Biophysical properties and ionic signature of neuronal
progenitors of the postnatal subventricular zone in situ. J Neurophysiol 90:2291–2302.
Wang DD, Krueger DD, Bordey A (2003b) GABA depolarizes neuronal progenitors of the postnatal subventricular zone via GABAA receptor activation. J Physiol (Lond) 550:785–800.
Young SZ, Platel JC, Nielsen JV, Jensen NA, Bordey A (2010) GABA(A) increases calcium in
subventricular zone astrocyte-like cells through L- and T-type voltage-gated calcium channels.
Front Cell Neurosci 4:8.

Index

A
Acetylcholine, 362
Acetylcholinesterase, 228
Activity-dependent control, 271
Activity-dependent regulation, 225–226
Actomyosin, 347
Adaptive role, 263
Adult-born neurons, 257
Adult neurogenesis, 47, 57–60, 62, 64,
67–68, 73, 76, 77, 257, 319, 327,
329, 371, 372, 375, 376, 380, 382–389
and academic politics, 34, 41
early peer reactions, 29–36
evolution, 153
hippocampus, 77
hostile reactions, 33–36
mammals, 137
neocortex, 21–26
olfactory bulb, 21–26
possible function, 149–153
teleost fish, 137–161
Adult stem cells, 143–144
Affective behavior, 277
Age, 266
Age-related cognitive decline, 233
Aging, 265
a-actin, 159
a-amino–3-hydroxy–5-methyl–4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA), 246, 247
a-enolase, 161
Altman, 193, 195
Altman, Joseph, 137
Alvarez-Buylla, 194
Alzheimer’s disease, 225, 233
AMPA. See a-amino–3-hydroxy–5-methyl–
4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA)
Anatomy, 320, 322–326
Angiogenesis, 350
Anterior olfactory nucleus (AON), 169, 170, 180

Apical–basal polarity, 288
aPKC, 289
Apoptosis, 358
Apoptotic cell death
role in neuronal regeneration in the brain
of teleost fish, 155–157
role in regulation of cell numbers during
postembryonic brain development in
teleost fish, 145–147
Apteronotus leptorhynchus, 139, 153
Arousal theory, 272
Ascl1, 206
Astrocyte, 87, 321–322, 332
Astrocyte ribbon, 322
Astrocytic processes, 350
ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling, 92
Attractive and repulsive signaling molecules,
342
Autoradiographic technique, 4
Autoradiography, different survival times, 9
Axon, 239, 241
B
Basal body, 289
Basal foot, 295
Basal lamina, 287. See also Basement
membranes (BMs)
Basement membranes (BMs), 110, 111, 115,
121, 122
Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH), 88
Bayer, S.A., 37, 195
BDNF, 341
Behavioural tasks, 261
b-catenin, 90, 208
b-enolase, 161
bHLH transcription factor, 88
Birdsong, 47–77
Blood vessels, 341, 350

T. Seki et al. (eds.), Neurogenesis in the Adult Brain I: Neurobiology,
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-53933-9 © Springer 2011

407

408
BMP, 198
Bone marrow zinc finger 2, putative role in
neuronal regeneration of cerebellum of
teleost fish, 161
Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), 96, 117
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF),
93, 279
Brain parenchyma, 323–326
BrdU. See 5-Bromo–2’-deoxyuridine (BrdU)
5-Bromo–2’-deoxyuridine (BrdU), 113, 114,
124, 138, 194
C
CA3, 238–241
Cajal-Retzius cells, 198, 202
Caudomedial pallium, 195
C57BL/6, 274
Cell migration, 323, 325, 333, 334
Cell proliferation in the adult brain, 112, 114
Centriole, 289
Centrosome, 344, 346
Centrosome reorientation, 346
Cerebellar cortex, 325, 328, 330–332
Cerebellum, 170, 182, 327–334. See also
Corpus cerebelli; Eminentia granularis; Valvula cerebelli
apoptotic cell death in teleost fish, 145
migration of adult-born cells in teleost
fish, 145
neuronal differentiation in teleost fish, 148
proliferation zones in teleost fish, 143
Chain formation, 339, 340
Chain migration, 325
Chains, 337, 338, 349
Chipmunks, 263
Cholinergic, 232
Choroid plexus, 112, 114, 125, 127, 128, 198,
209
Chromatin modification, 90–93
Circuit activity, 243–248
Clusters, 205
Cognition, 248, 249, 251
Collagen, 113, 115, 121
Computational model, 275
Contextual fear conditioning (CFC), 250, 261
Convergent extension, 290
Corpus cerebelli, 143
lesion paradigm in teleost fish, 154
migration of adult-born cells in teleost
fish, 145
Cortex
dorsal (DC), 170, 179, 180, 182–184

Index
dorsomedial (DMC), 170, 178–180, 182,
183
frontal, 323, 333
lateral (LC), 170, 179, 180, 183
medial (MC), 170, 175, 177–180
Cortical hem, 195, 198, 209
Critical period, 359
Critical time window, 275–277
Cumulative labeling technique, 9, 16
CXCl12, 199
CXCR4, 199
Cytokine, 117, 126–128
Cytosine arabinoside (Ara-C), 294
Cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase, 161
D
78,000-Da glucose-regulated protein, 160
Degranulated hippocampus, 3
Delayed non-matching to sample (DNMTS),
262
Dendrite, 239, 241, 244–246
Dendritic spine, 239, 241, 242
Dentate gyrus (DG), 238–241, 243–245,
247–249, 260, 291
Dentate migration, 196
Dentate notch, 196
Deuterosomes, 295
Differentiation, neuronal, 148
Discovery of new neurons, 193–195
Dishevelled, 299
DNA methylation, 88, 98
DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1), 99
Donald Hebb, 272
Donepezil, 228
Dopamine (DA), 239, 240
Dorsal ventricular ridge (DVR), 170, 179,
180, 183
Doublecortin, 325–328, 331, 332
E
Early postnatal neurogenesis, 200
EGF. See Epidermal growth factor (EGF)
Electron microscopy, 328
Embryonic neurogenesis, 195–200
Eminentia granularis, 143
Emotions, 277
Enriched environments, 8, 217, 265, 272–273
Entorhinal cortex, 220, 238–240, 244, 259
Environmental enrichment, 272
Ependyma, 111, 127
Ependymal cells, 291

Index
Epidermal growth factor (EGF), 292
Epigenetic modification, 88, 98–99
Extracellular matrix (ECM), 110, 116, 340
F
F-actin, 347
F-ATP synthase b-subunit, 161
FGF, 292
Fibroblast growth factor (FGF), 117, 121–124
Fimbria-fornix pathway, 220
Fractone
binding of growth factors to, 123–126
definition, 110
in development, 126
processing growth factors by, 126–128
relationship to neural stem cells, 125
role, 127, 128
ultrastructure, 111
visualization by immunofluorescence, 112
Frontal cortex, 323, 333
G
GABA. See g-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
GABAA, 276
GABAergic, 232
inputs, 229, 230
interneurons, 219, 231
network, 219
Gage, 194
g-aminobutyric acid (GABA), 218, 238–240,
242, 244–248, 277, 341, 395–405
Gamma spikes, 221
Genomic regulation of development of
adult-born cells, 148–149
GFAP. See Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)
GFAP-expressing neural progenitors, 200
GFAP+ intermediate progenitors, 207
GFAP+ primary cells, 201
Glial cell proliferation, 5
Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), 94, 98,
200, 223, 300
Glial tubes, 323, 337, 338, 341
Gliogenesis, 176
Gli3 repressor, 299
Glucocorticoid receptor, 279
Glutamate, 240, 242, 246, 247
Glutamate receptor, 395–403
Glutamine synthetase
downregulation after brain trauma in
mammals, 160–161
upregulation after brain trauma in fish,
160–161

409
Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3), 90
Gp130, 95
Granule cell, 238–241, 243, 245, 357
and glutamatargic synapses, 360
and long-term survival, 363
and number, 364
and replacement, 364
and subtypes, 366
hypoplasia, 13–18
hypoplasia and behavior, 18–21
hypoplasia and learning, 20
labeling, 6, 10, 11
Granule neurons, 262
Gross, C.G., 29
Growth factors, 116–128
Growth of brain in teleost fish, 148
GSK3. See Glycogen synthase kinase 5
Guidance of adult-born cells
in brain of teleost fish, 144–145
H
Hedgehog, 298
Heparansase, 124
Heparan sulfate
binding domains, 118
chains, 118
epitope, 121
hypervariability, 119–120
modifying enzymes, 119
proteoglycans, 113, 116–119, 121
substrate, 120
Heparin-binding growth factors,
116–117, 122
HES-1, 89
HES-5, 89, 96
Hilar proliferating cells, 201
Hilus, 200, 238–241, 245, 246
Hippocampal activity, 217
Hippocampal circuit activity, 227
Hippocampal circuitry, 257
Hippocampal EEG activities, 221
Hippocampal glioepithelium, 28
Hippocampal neuroepithelium, 28
Hippocampal neurogenesis, 238–240,
243–251
and age, 9, 12, 16, 17
guinea pig, 9
postnatal, 27–28
prenatal, 27–28
rat, 7
Hippocampus, 237–251, 259
adult neurogenesis in homologous area in
teleost fish, 143

410
Hippocampus (Cont.)
adult neurogenesis in mammals, 139
germinal matrices, 28
persistence of adult-born cells, 148
Histone acetyltransferases (HATs), 90
Histone deacetylase (HDACs), 90, 94
Histone modification, 88
[3H]-thymidine, 291
Hu, 200, 206
Hu+/GFAP+ proliferating cell, 206
Human SVZ, 348
Hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis, 278
I
Immature new neurons, 231–232
Immediate early genes (IEGs), 239, 242–244,
275
Impoverishment, 272
Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cell, 103
Inflammation, 350
Inhibition, 374, 384, 386
Inhibitor of differentiation (ID), 90, 96
Injury
chemical, 171, 182
physical, 171, 182, 184, 185
Input resistance, 222, 224
Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF–1), 100, 279
Interferon, 117
Interkinetic nuclear migration, 288
Interleukin-6 (IL-6), 95
Intermediate progenitors, 205, 206, 289
Interneuron, 326, 328, 331
Intraflagellar transport (IFT), 298
Inversin, 299
IR, 226
J
Janus tyrosine kinase (JAK), 96, 98
K
Kaplan, M.S., 33
Kempermann, G., 29
Keratin-10, 160
Ki-67, 266
L
Laboratory rodents, 258
Lagomorpha, 319, 320, 323, 326, 332, 334
Laminin, 110
Lateral ventricle, 109, 111, 125, 321, 322, 325

Index
Leading process, 344, 345
Learning, 259, 272, 276
and memory, 217, 245, 248–250
tasks, 261
theory, 272
Life-span, 266
Local progenitor cells, 334
Long-term memory, 262
Long-term potentiation (LTP), 239, 242–244,
246–249, 276, 277
M
Macaca fascicularis, 347
Macaca mulatta, 347
Macaque, 347
Macroglia, role in removal of damaged cells,
157–158
Macrophage, 110
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 259
Major depression, 277
Mammalian neurogenesis, 3–42
Map5, 331, 332
MASH, 90, 96
MASH-1, 200
MASH-1+/GFAP+ proliferating cell, 206
Matrix zones, 138. See also Proliferation
zones
Maturation, 239, 241, 242, 244–248, 251
Memory, 259, 382, 386, 388
Meninges, 115, 116, 127, 128, 198
Mice, 265
Microglia, role in removal of damaged cells,
157–158
Microneurons, 3, 177
Microtubule, 346
Middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO), 348
Migration, 202, 396, 397, 399, 401–403
of adult-born cells in brain of teleost fish,
144–145
radial, 171, 175
tangential, 171, 175, 176
Morphogens, 197
Morris water maze (MWM), 242, 243, 246,
248–250
Mossy cells, 238–240, 244, 245
Mossy fibers, 218, 231, 232, 275
Multipotency, 292
Myosin heavy chain, 160
N
Namba, 201
Natural populations, 258

Index
N-cadherin, 208
N–C coupling, 346
Neonate-born granule cells, 364
Neural progenitor, 174
Neural progenitor cells, 228, 243
Neural stem and progenitor cell (NSPC), 110,
124, 127
Neural stem cell (NSC), 87, 209, 218, 222,
223, 226, 291, 376, 377, 381
Neural stem cell niche, 109–110, 117–119,
126–128
Neural tube defects, 290
Neuroblasts, 292, 321–323, 325–330, 333
NeuroD, 89, 91, 199
Neuroepithelial (NE) cells, 288
Neuroepithelium, 287
Neuroepithelium and neurogenesis, 38
Neurogenesis, 288
Neurogenic reserve hypothesis, 276
Neurogenic sites, 320, 333, 334
Neurogenin1, 89
Neurogenin2, 89, 199
Neuromodulatory systems, 362
Neuronal migration, 337
Neuronal progenitor cells, 218, 224, 229
Neuronal regeneration, 153–161
apoptotic cell death, role of, 155–157
in cerebellum of teleost fish, 153–161
proteomic analysis of regeneration-associated proteins, 159–161
removal of cellular debris by microglia/
macrophages, 157–158
in retina and optic tectum of teleost fish,
153
in spinal cord of teleost fish, 153
Neuronal replacement, 47–77
Neuronal survival, 58, 66, 68–70, 72, 74, 75,
77
Neuron labeling, 7
Neuron-restrictive silencer element (NRSE),
93
Neuron-restrictive silencer factor (NRSF), 93
Neuroprotection through calbindin-D28k, 158
Neurospheres, 143–144, 292
Neurotransmitter, 239, 240, 246, 248, 395
Niche, 203
NMDA. See N-methyl-D-aspartic acid
(NMDA)
N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA), 244–247,
277
Noggin, 96, 304
Noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs), 88, 93
Noradrenaline, 362
Norepinephrine (NE), 239, 240, 244, 245

411
Normal aging, 233
Notch, 90
Notch1, 199
Notch signaling, 306
Nottebohm, F., 29
Novel object recognition, 249, 250
Nowakowski, R.S., 194
N-sulfates, 117
Nuclear factor I/A (NFIA), 97
Nuclear factor I/B (NFIB), 97
Nuclear movement, 344
Nucleus sphericus (NS), 170, 180, 182, 183
Numerical matching hypothesis, 149–153
O
Olfaction, 372, 382, 384–387
Olfactory bulb (OB), 170, 175–177, 179, 180,
182, 292, 337, 372–387, 389
adult neurogenesis
in mammals, 139
persistence of adult-born cells, 148
in teleost fish, 143
neurogenesis, 24
neurogenesis and age, 26
OLIG1, 100
OLIG2, 100
Oligodendrocyte, 87, 99
Optic tectum
cell proliferation related to formation of
new photoreceptor cells, 138, 145
neuronal regeneration, 153
Organizer for the hippocampus, 197
Oscillations, 374, 375
P
P300, 89
Par-3, 289
Par-6, 289
Paradigm change, 39–42
Patched1, 298
Patterning centers, 197
Pax2, 328, 331, 332
Perception, 375
Perforant pathway, 220
Perinuclear cage, 346
Persistence of adult-born cells
in brain of mammals, 148
in brain of teleost fish, 148
Pial surface, 209
Pinwheels, 304
PK44, 342
Planar polarity, 288
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), 100

412
Postnatal, 323, 325–332
gliogenesis, 8–28
neurogenesis, 8–28
Precursor cell labeling, 12
Primary cilium, 289
Primary dentate neuroepithelium, 196
Primary progenitors, 205, 206
Primates, 347
Projection neuron, 177
Proliferation, 238, 243–245, 247–249, 251,
396, 399, 401, 403, 404
Proliferation zones
in brain of mammals, 139
in brain of teleost fish, 139–143
Proteomics, approach to identify regenerationassociated proteins, 159
PSA, 206
PSA-NCAM, 194, 230, 323, 325, 326, 328,
331, 332, 340
Pseudodementia, 278
R
Rabbit, 319–334
Radial glia, 202
role in guidance of adult-born cells during
neuronal regeneration in teleost fish,
158–159
role in guidance of adult-born cells during
postembryonic development in teleost
fish, 145
Radial glial cells, 173–176, 184, 203, 289
Radial migration, 343
Radial processes, 226
Radiation, 262
Rakic, P., 33
Rats, 261
RBPJ/k, 97
Reactive gliosis, 350
Reactive neurogenesis, 170, 171, 184
RE1-binding site (RE1), 93
Receptor tyrosine kinases, 340
Reelin, 202, 343
Regeneration, 170, 182, 184
Reptiles
Anolis carolinensis, 181, 184
Gallotia galloti, 181, 182, 184, 185
Podarcis hispanica, 173, 175, 176,
179–182, 184
Psammodromus algirus, 175, 181
Tarentola mauritanica, 172, 176, 179–181
Trachemys scripta, 172, 176, 177, 179–182
Tropidurus hispidus, 175, 181, 185

Index
RE1-silencing transcription factor (REST), 93
Resting membrane potential, 224
Retina
apoptotic cell death during postembryonic
development, 145
formation of new photoreceptor cells, 138
Retraction, 344
Retrovirus-GFP, 202, 207
Rho family small GTPases, 345
Rodents, 319, 320, 322, 323, 325, 327,
331–334
Rostral migratory stream (RMS), 3, 21, 139,
292, 338
and age, 23
cell migration, 25
S
S100b, 94, 99, 200
Schizophrenia, 277
SDF-1, 199
Secondary dentate matrix, 196, 210
Secondary dentate migration, 196
Seizure, 242–246
Seki, 194
Self-renewal, 292
Sensory deprivation, 359
Sensory experience, 359
Sensory input, 343
Septal cholinergic neurons, 228
Septum (SP), 170, 179, 180, 182, 220, 238,
244, 245
Serotonin, 239, 240
Shh. See Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
Signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT), 96, 98
Slit, 342
Smoothened, 298
Sonic hedgehog (Shh), 100, 208
Sox2, 206, 223
Spatial learning, 259
Spatial water maze, 261
Squirrel, 260
Stem cell luekemia (Scl), 97, 98
Stem cells, 395–397, 399, 401, 403, 404
Stress, 278, 279
Striated rootlet, 298
Striatum (ST), 170, 177, 179, 180, 319, 320,
326, 327, 333, 348
Stroke, 218, 225
Subependymal layer, 55, 66
Subgranular zone (SGZ), 238, 239, 245, 248,
249, 251, 292

Index
cat, 15
dentate gyrus, 139
guinea pig, 14
rat, 10
Subpial layer, 325, 328–330
Subpial regions, 210
Subventricular zone (SVZ), 289, 319–321, 337
Subventricular zone of lateral ventricle, 139
Sulci, 172, 173, 176, 185
Superenrichment, 272
Survival, 243–247, 249
129/SvJ, 274
SWI/SNF complex, 92
Symmetrical cell division, 201
Synapses, 372–374, 378–380, 383, 385, 386
Synaptic integration, 402
T
Tangential chains, 328, 330
Tangentially oriented processes, 206
Tangential migration, 207
Tangential process, 207
Telencephalon, dorsal
adult neurogenesis in teleost fish, 143
homologous structure to mammalian
hippocampus, 143
Tenascin-R, 343
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl-transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end-labeling
(TUNEL), 145
Tertiary dentate matrix, 196, 200, 210
Theta-burst stimulation, 227
Theta-rhythm, 220–223, 226, 228, 233
Thymidine autoradiography, 3, 5, 37, 138
Thymidine autoradiography and the BrdU
technique, 40
Time-lapse experiments, 201
Trace eye-blink conditioning, 262
Tract tracing, retrograde, 148, 159

413
Trailing process, 202
Transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b), 92
Transit-amplifying cells, 289
Tri-synaptic circuit, 259
TSA, 102
b-Tubulin, 159
TUNEL. See Terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick
end-labeling
Type 1 theta, 221
Type 2 theta, 221
V
Valproic acid (VPA), 91
Valvula cerebelli
migration of adult-born cells in teleost fish,
145
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
279
Ventricular zone, 289
Vocal learning, 47–50, 53, 54, 58, 67, 71, 73,
76, 77
Voluntary exercise, 217, 225
Voluntary physical activity, 273
W
Water-maze, 275, 276
Wnt, 198, 208
Wnt signaling, 298
Y
Yin Yang 1 (YY1), 102
Young neurons, 257
Z
Zebrafish, 139

